running twice as fast as Farmer Brown's boy! He bumped into trees and
crashed through bushes and jumped over logs, and in almost no time at
all he was out of sight. Altogether it was the most surprising thing
that the little people of the Green Forest ever had seen.

[Illustration: Buster Bear was running away, too. Page _71_.]

Sammy Jay looked at Blacky the Crow, and Blacky looked at Chatterer,
and Chatterer looked at Happy Jack, and Happy Jack looked at Peter
Rabbit, and Peter looked at Unc' Billy Possum, and Unc' Billy looked at
Bobby Coon, and Bobby looked at Johnny Chuck, and Johnny looked at Reddy
Fox, and Reddy looked at Jimmy Skunk, and Jimmy looked at Billy Mink,
and Billy looked at Little Joe Otter, and for a minute nobody could say
a word. Then Little Joe gave a funny little gasp.

"Why, why-e-e!" said he, "I believe Buster Bear is afraid too!" Unc'
Billy Possum chuckled. "Ah believe yo' are right again, Brer Otter,"
said he. "It cert'nly does look so. If Brer Bear isn't scared, he must
have remembered something impo'tant and has gone to attend to it in a
powerful hurry."

Then everybody began to laugh.




XV

BUSTER BEAR IS A FALLEN HERO


A fallen hero is some one to whom every one has looked up as very brave
and then proves to be less brave than he was supposed to be. That was
the way with Buster Bear. When Little Joe Otter had told how Farmer
Brown's boy had been afraid at the mere sight of one of Buster Bear's
big footprints, they had at once made a hero of Buster. At least some of
them had. As this was the first time, the very first time, that they had
ever known any one who lives in the Green Forest to make Farmer Brown's
boy run away, they looked on Buster Bear with a great deal of respect
and were very proud of him.

But now they had seen Buster Bear and Farmer Brown's boy meet face to
face; and while it was true that Farmer Brown's boy had run away as fast
as ever he could, it was also true that Buster Bear had done the same
thing. He had run even faster than Farmer Brown's boy, and had hidden in
the most lonely place he could find in the very deepest part of the
Green Forest. It was hard to believe, but it was true. And right away
everybody lost a great deal of the respect for Buster which they had
felt. It is always that way. They began to say unkind things about him.
They said them among themselves, and some of them even said them to
Buster when they met him, or said them so that he would hear them.

Of course Blacky the Crow and Sammy Jay, who, because they can fly,
have nothing to fear from Buster, and who always delight in making other
people uncomfortable, never let a chance go by to tell Buster and
everybody else within hearing what they thought of him. They delighted
in flying about through the Green Forest until they had found Buster
Bear and then from the safety of the tree tops screaming at him.

  "Buster Bear is big and strong;
  His teeth are big; his claws are long;
  In spite of these he runs away
  And hides himself the livelong day!"

A dozen times a day Buster would hear them screaming this. He would
grind his teeth and glare up at them, but that was all he could do. He
couldn't get at them. He just had to stand it and do nothing. But when
impudent little Chatterer the Red Squirrel shouted the same thing from
a place just out of reach in a big pine-tree, Buster could stand it no
longer. He gave a deep, angry growl that made little shivers run over
Chatterer, and then suddenly he started up that tree after Chatterer.
With a frightened little shriek Chatterer scampered to the top of the
tree. He hadn't known that Buster could climb. But Buster is a splendid
climber, especially when the tree is big and stout as this one was, and
now he went up after Chatterer, growling angrily.

How Chatterer did wish that he had kept his tongue still! He ran to the
very top of the tree, so frightened that his teeth chattered, and when
he looked down and saw Buster's great mouth coming nearer and nearer, he
nearly tumbled down with terror. The worst of it was there wasn't
another tree near enough for him to jump to. He was in trouble this
time, was Chatterer, sure enough! And there was no one to help him.




XVI

CHATTERER THE RED SQUIRREL JUMPS FOR HIS LIFE


It isn't very often that Chatterer the Red Squirrel knows fear. That is
one reason that he is so often impudent and saucy. But once in a while a
great fear takes possession of him, as when he knows that Shadow the
Weasel is looking for him. You see, he knows that Shadow can go wherever
he can go. There are very few of the little people of the Green Forest
and the Green Meadows who do not know fear at some time or other, but it
comes to Chatterer as seldom as to any one, because he is very sure of
himself and his ability to hide or run away from danger.

But now as he clung to a little branch near the top of a tall pine-tree
in the Green Forest and looked down at the big sharp teeth of Buster
Bear drawing nearer and nearer, and listened to the deep, angry growls
that made his hair stand on end, Chatterer was too frightened to think.
If only he had kept his tongue still instead of saying hateful things to
Buster Bear! If only he had known that Buster could climb a tree! If
only he had chosen a tree near enough to other trees for him to jump
across! But he _had_ said hateful things, he _had_ chosen to sit in a
tree which stood quite by itself, and Buster Bear _could_ climb!
Chatterer was in the worst kind of trouble, and there was no one to
blame but himself. That is usually the case with those who get into
trouble.

Nearer and nearer came Buster Bear, and deeper and angrier sounded his
voice. Chatterer gave a little frightened gasp and looked this way and
looked that way. What should he do? What _could_ he do! The ground
seemed a terrible distance below. If only he had wings like Sammy Jay!
But he hadn't.

"Gr-r-r-r!" growled Buster Bear. "I'll teach you manners! I'll teach you
to treat your betters with respect! I'll swallow you whole, that's what
I'll do. Gr-r-r-r!"

"Oh!" cried Chatterer.

"Gr-r-r-r! I'll eat you all up to the last hair on your tail!" growled
Buster, scrambling a little nearer.

"Oh! Oh!" cried Chatterer, and ran out to the very tip of the little
branch to which he had been clinging. Now if Chatterer had only known
it, Buster Bear couldn't reach him way up there, because the tree was
too small at the top for such a big fellow as Buster. But Chatterer
didn't think of that. He gave one more frightened look down at those big
teeth, then he shut his eyes and jumped--jumped straight out for the
far-away ground.

It was a long, long, long way down to the ground, and it certainly
looked as if such a little fellow as Chatterer must be killed. But
Chatterer had learned from Old Mother Nature that she had given him
certain things to help him at just such times, and one of them is the
power to spread himself very flat. He did it now. He spread his arms and
legs out just as far as he could, and that kept him from falling as fast
and as hard as he otherwise would have done, because being spread out so
flat that way, the air held him up a little. And then there was his
tail, that funny little tail he is so fond of jerking when he scolds.
This helped him too. It helped him keep his balance and keep from
turning over and over.

Down, down, down he sailed and landed on his feet. Of course, he hit the
ground pretty hard, and for just a second he quite lost his breath. But
it was only for a second, and then he was scurrying off as fast as a
frightened Squirrel could. Buster Bear watched him and grinned.

"I didn't catch him that time," he growled, "but I guess I gave him a
good fright and taught him a lesson."




XVII

BUSTER BEAR GOES BERRYING


Buster Bear is a great hand to talk to himself when he thinks no one is
around to overhear. It's a habit. However, it isn't a bad habit unless
it is carried too far. Any habit becomes bad, if it is carried too far.
Suppose you had a secret, a real secret, something that nobody else knew
and that you didn't want anybody else to know. And suppose you had the
habit of talking to yourself. You might, without thinking, you know,
tell that secret out loud to yourself, and some one might, just might
happen to overhear! Then there wouldn't be any secret. That is the way
that a habit which isn't bad in itself can become bad when it is
carried too far.

Now Buster Bear had lived by himself in the Great Woods so long that
this habit of talking to himself had grown and grown. He did it just to
keep from being lonesome. Of course, when he came down to the Green
Forest to live, he brought all his habits with him. That is one thing
about habits,--you always take them with you wherever you go. So Buster
brought this habit of talking to himself down to the Green Forest, where
he had many more neighbors than he had in the Great Woods.

"Let me see, let me see, what is there to tempt my appetite?" said
Buster in his deep, grumbly-rumbly voice. "I find my appetite isn't what
it ought to be. I need a change. Yes, Sir, I need a change. There is
something I ought to have at this time of year, and I haven't got it.
There is something that I used to have and don't have now. Ha! I know! I
need some fresh fruit. That's it--fresh fruit! It must be about berry
time now, and I'd forgotten all about it. My, my, my, how good some
berries would taste! Now if I were back up there in the Great Woods I
could have all I could eat. Um-m-m-m! Makes my mouth water just to think
of it. There ought to be some up in the Old Pasture. There ought to be a
lot of 'em up there. If I wasn't afraid that some one would see me, I'd
go up there."

Buster sighed. Then he sighed again. The more he thought about those
berries he felt sure were growing in the Old Pasture, the more he wanted
some. It seemed to him that never in all his life had he wanted berries
as he did now. He wandered about uneasily. He was hungry--hungry for
berries and nothing else. By and by he began talking to himself again.

"If I wasn't afraid of being seen, I'd go up to the Old Pasture this
very minute. Seems as if I could taste those berries." He licked his
lips hungrily as he spoke. Then his face brightened. "I know what I'll
do! I'll go up there at the very first peep of day to-morrow. I can eat
all I want and get back to the Green Forest before there is any danger
that Farmer Brown's boy or any one else I'm afraid of will see me.
That's just what I'll do. My, I wish to-morrow morning would hurry up
and come."

Now though Buster didn't know it, some one had been listening, and that
some one was none other than Sammy Jay. When at last Buster lay down
for a nap, Sammy flew away, chuckling to himself. "I believe I'll visit
the Old Pasture to-morrow morning myself," thought he. "I have an idea
that something interesting may happen if Buster doesn't change his
mind."

Sammy was on the lookout very early the next morning. The first Jolly
Little Sunbeams had only reached the Green Meadows and had not started
to creep into the Green Forest, when he saw a big, dark form steal out
of the Green Forest where it joins the Old Pasture. It moved very
swiftly and silently, as if in a great hurry. Sammy knew who it was: it
was Buster Bear, and he was going berrying. Sammy waited a little until
he could see better. Then he too started for the Old Pasture.




XVIII

SOMEBODY ELSE GOES BERRYING


Isn't it funny how two people will often think of the same thing at the
same time, and neither one know that the other is thinking of it? That
is just what happened the day that Buster Bear first thought of going
berrying. While he was walking around in the Green Forest, talking to
himself about how hungry he was for some berries and how sure he was
that there must be some up in the Old Pasture, some one else was
thinking about berries and about the Old Pasture too.

"Will you make me a berry pie if I will get the berries to-morrow?"
asked Farmer Brown's boy of his mother.

Of course Mrs. Brown promised that she would, and so that night Farmer
Brown's boy went to bed very early that he might get up early in the
morning, and all night long he dreamed of berries and berry pies. He was
awake even before jolly, round, red Mr. Sun thought it was time to get
up, and he was all ready to start for the Old Pasture when the first
Jolly Little Sunbeams came dancing across the Green Meadows. He carried
a big tin pail, and in the bottom of it, wrapped up in a piece of paper,
was a lunch, for he meant to stay until he filled that pail, if it took
all day.

Now the Old Pasture is very large. It lies at the foot of the Big
Mountain, and even extends a little way up on the Big Mountain. There is
room in it for many people to pick berries all day without even seeing
each other, unless they roam about a great deal. You see, the bushes
grow very thick there, and you cannot see very far in any direction.
Jolly, round, red Mr. Sun had climbed a little way up in the sky by the
time Farmer Brown's boy reached the Old Pasture, and was smiling down on
all the Great World, and all the Great World seemed to be smiling back.
Farmer Brown's boy started to whistle, and then he stopped.

"If I whistle," thought he, "everybody will know just where I am, and
will keep out of sight, and I never can get acquainted with folks if
they keep out of sight."

You see, Farmer Brown's boy was just beginning to understand something
that Peter Rabbit and the other little people of the Green Meadows and
the Green Forest learned almost as soon as they learned to walk,--that
if you don't want to be seen, you mustn't be heard. So he didn't
whistle as he felt like doing, and he tried not to make a bit of noise
as he followed an old cow-path towards a place where he knew the berries
grew thick and oh, so big, and all the time he kept his eyes wide open,
and he kept his ears open too.

That is how he happened to hear a little cry, a very faint little cry.
If he had been whistling, he wouldn't have heard it at all. He stopped
to listen. He never had heard a cry just like it before. At first he
couldn't make out just what it was or where it came from. But one thing
he was sure of, and that was that it was a cry of fright. He stood
perfectly still and listened with all his might. There it was
again--"Help! Help! Help"--and it was very faint and sounded terribly
frightened. He waited a minute or two, but heard nothing more. Then he
put down his pail and began a hurried look here, there, and everywhere.
He was sure that it had come from somewhere on the ground, so he peered
behind bushes and peeped behind logs and stones, and then just as he had
about given up hope of finding where it came from, he went around a
little turn in the old cow-path, and there right in front of him was
little Mr. Gartersnake, and what do you think he was doing? Well, I
don't like to tell you, but he was trying to swallow one of the children
of Stickytoes the Tree Toad. Of course Farmer Brown's Boy didn't let
him. He made little Mr. Gartersnake set Master Stickytoes free and held
Mr. Gartersnake until Master Stickytoes was safely out of reach.




XIX

BUSTER BEAR HAS A FINE TIME


Buster Bear was having the finest time he had had since he came down
from the Great Woods to live in the Green Forest. To be sure, he wasn't
in the Green Forest now, but he wasn't far from it. He was in the Old
Pasture, one edge of which touches one edge of the Green Forest. And
where do you think he was, in the Old Pasture? Why, right in the middle
of the biggest patch of the biggest blueberries he ever had seen in all
his life! Now if there is any one thing that Buster Bear had rather have
above another, it is all the berries he can eat, unless it be honey.
Nothing can quite equal honey in Buster's mind. But next to honey give
him berries. He isn't particular what kind of berries. Raspberries,
blackberries, or blueberries, either kind, will make him perfectly
happy.

"Um-m-m, my, my, but these are good!" he mumbled in his deep
grumbly-rumbly voice, as he sat on his haunches stripping off the
berries greedily. His little eyes twinkled with enjoyment, and he didn't
mind at all if now and then he got leaves, and some green berries in his
mouth with the big ripe berries. He didn't try to get them out. Oh, my,
no! He just chomped them all up together and patted his stomach from
sheer delight. Now Buster had reached the Old Pasture just as jolly,
round, red Mr. Sun had crept out of bed, and he had fully made up his
mind that he would be back in the Green Forest before Mr. Sun had
climbed very far up in the blue, blue sky. You see, big as he is and
strong as he is, Buster Bear is very shy and bashful, and he has no
desire to meet Farmer Brown, or Farmer Brown's boy, or any other of
those two-legged creatures called men. It seems funny but he actually is
afraid of them. And he had a feeling that he was a great deal more
likely to meet one of them in the Old Pasture than deep in the Green
Forest.

So when he started to look for berries, he made up his mind that he
would eat what he could in a great hurry and get back to the Green
Forest before Farmer Brown's boy was more than out of bed. But when he
found those berries he was so hungry that he forgot his fears and
everything else. They tasted so good that he just had to eat and eat
and eat. Now you know that Buster is a very big fellow, and it takes a
lot to fill him up. He kept eating and eating and eating, and the more
he ate the more he wanted. You know how it is. So he wandered from one
patch of berries to another in the Old Pasture, and never once thought
of the time. Somehow, time is the hardest thing in the world to
remember, when you are having a good time.

Jolly, round, red Mr. Sun climbed higher and higher in the blue, blue
sky. He looked down on all the Great World and saw all that was going
on. He saw Buster Bear in the Old Pasture, and smiled as he saw what a
perfectly glorious time Buster was having. And he saw something else in
the Old Pasture that made his smile still broader. He saw Farmer Brown's
boy filling a great tin pail with blueberries, and he knew that Farmer
Brown's boy didn't know that Buster Bear was anywhere about, and he knew
that Buster Bear didn't know that Farmer Brown's boy was anywhere about,
and somehow he felt very sure that he would see something funny happen
if they should chance to meet.

"Um-m-m, um-m-m," mumbled Buster Bear with his mouth full, as he moved
along to another patch of berries. And then he gave a little gasp of
surprise and delight. Right in front of him was a shiny thing just full
of the finest, biggest, bluest berries! There were no leaves or green
ones there. Buster blinked his greedy little eyes rapidly and looked
again. No, he wasn't dreaming. They were real berries, and all he had
got to do was to help himself. Buster looked sharply at the shiny thing
that held the berries. It seemed perfectly harmless. He reached out a
big paw and pushed it gently. It tipped over and spilled out a lot of
the berries. Yes, it was perfectly harmless. Buster gave a little sigh
of pure happiness. He would eat those berries to the last one, and then
he would go home to the Green Forest.




XX

BUSTER BEAR CARRIES OFF THE PAIL OF FARMER BROWN'S BOY


The question is, did Buster Bear steal Farmer Brown's boy's pail? To
steal is to take something which belongs to some one else. There is no
doubt that he stole the berries that were in the pail when he found it,
for he deliberately ate them. He knew well enough that some one must
have picked them--for whoever heard of blueberries growing in tin pails?
So there is no doubt that when Buster took them, he stole them. But with
the pail it was different. He took the pail, but he didn't mean to take
it. In fact, he didn't want that pail at all.

You see it was this way: When Buster found that big tin pail brimming
full of delicious berries in the shade of that big bush in the Old
Pasture, he didn't stop to think whether or not he had a right to them.
Buster is so fond of berries that from the very second that his greedy
little eyes saw that pailful, he forgot everything but the feast that
was waiting for him right under his very nose. He didn't think anything
about the right or wrong of helping himself. There before him were more
berries than he had ever seen together at one time in all his life, and
all he had to do was to eat and eat and eat. And that is just what he
did do. Of course he upset the pail, but he didn't mind a little thing
like that. When he had gobbled up all the berries that rolled out, he
thrust his nose into the pail to get all that were left in it. Just
then he heard a little noise, as if some one were coming. He threw up
his head to listen, and somehow, he never did know just how, the handle
of the pail slipped back over his ears and caught there.

This was bad enough, but to make matters worse, just at that very minute
he heard a shrill, angry voice shout, "Hi, there! Get out of there!" He
didn't need to be told whose voice that was. It was the voice of Farmer
Brown's boy. Right then and there Buster Bear nearly had a fit. There
was that awful pail fast over his head so that he couldn't see a thing.
Of course, that meant that he couldn't run away, which was the thing of
all things he most wanted to do, for big as he is and strong as he is,
Buster is very shy and bashful when human beings are around. He growled
and whined and squealed. He tried to back out of the pail and couldn't.
He tried to shake it off and couldn't. He tried to pull it off, but
somehow he couldn't get hold of it. Then there was another yell. If
Buster hadn't been so frightened himself, he might have recognized that
second yell as one of fright, for that is what it was. You see Farmer
Brown's boy had just discovered Buster Bear. When he had yelled the
first time, he had supposed that it was one of the young cattle who live
in the Old Pasture all summer, but when he saw Buster, he was just as
badly frightened as Buster himself. In fact, he was too surprised and
frightened even to run. After that second yell he just stood still and
stared.

Buster clawed at that awful thing on his head more frantically than
ever. Suddenly it slipped off, so that he could see. He gave one
frightened look at Farmer Brown's boy, and then with a mighty "Woof!" he
started for the Green Forest as fast as his legs could take him, and
this was very fast indeed, let me tell you. He didn't stop to pick out a
path, but just crashed through the bushes as if they were nothing at
all, just nothing at all. But the funniest thing of all is this--he took
that pail with him! Yes, Sir, Buster Bear ran away with the big tin pail
of Farmer Brown's boy! You see when it slipped off his head, the handle
was still around his neck, and there he was running away with a pail
hanging from his neck! He didn't want it. He would have given anything
to get rid of it. But he took it because he couldn't help it. And that
brings us back to the question, did Buster steal Farmer Brown's boy's
pail? What do you think?




XXI

SAMMY JAY MAKES THINGS WORSE FOR BUSTER BEAR


"Thief, thief, thief! Thief, thief, thief!" Sammy Jay was screaming at
the top of his lungs, as he followed Buster Bear across the Old Pasture
towards the Green Forest. Never had he screamed so loud, and never had
his voice sounded so excited. The little people of the Green Forest, the
Green Meadows, and the Smiling Pool are so used to hearing Sammy cry
thief that usually they think very little about it. But every blessed
one who heard Sammy this morning stopped whatever he was doing and
pricked up his ears to listen.

Sammy's cousin, Blacky the Crow, just happened to be flying along the
edge of the Old Pasture, and the minute he heard Sammy's voice, he
turned and flew over to see what it was all about. Just as soon as he
caught sight of Buster Bear running for the Green Forest as hard as ever
he could, he understood what had excited Sammy so. He was so surprised
that he almost forgot to keep his wings moving. Buster Bear had what
looked to Blacky very much like a tin pail hanging from his neck! No
wonder Sammy was excited. Blacky beat his wings fiercely and started
after Sammy.

And so they reached the edge of the Green Forest, Buster Bear running as
hard as ever he could, Sammy Jay flying just behind him and screaming,
"Thief, thief, thief!" at the top of his lungs, and behind him Blacky
the Crow, trying to catch up and yelling as loud as he could, "Caw,
caw, caw! Come on, everybody! Come on! Come on!"

Poor Buster! It was bad enough to be frightened almost to death as he
had been up in the Old Pasture when the pail had caught over his head
just as Farmer Brown's boy had yelled at him. Then to have the handle of
the pail slip down around his neck so that he couldn't get rid of the
pail but had to take it with him as he ran, was making a bad matter
worse. Now to have all his neighbors of the Green Forest see him in such
a fix and make fun of him, was more than he could stand. He felt
humiliated. That is just another way of saying shamed. Yes, Sir, Buster
felt that he was shamed in the eyes of his neighbors, and he wanted
nothing so much as to get away by himself, where no one could see him,
and try to get rid of that dreadful pail. But Buster is so big that it
is not easy for him to find a hiding place. So, when he reached the
Green Forest, he kept right on to the deepest, darkest, most lonesome
part and crept under the thickest hemlock-tree he could find.

But it was of no use. The sharp eyes of Sammy Jay and Blacky the Crow
saw him. They actually flew into the very tree under which he was
hiding, and how they did scream! Pretty soon Ol' Mistah Buzzard came
dropping down out of the blue, blue sky and took a seat on a convenient
dead tree, where he could see all that went on. Ol' Mistah Buzzard began
to grin as soon as he saw that tin pail on Buster's neck. Then came
others,--Redtail the Hawk, Scrapper the Kingbird, Redwing the Blackbird,
Drummer the Woodpecker, Welcome Robin, Tommy Tit the Chickadee, Jenny
Wren, Redeye the Vireo, and ever so many more. They came from the Old
Orchard, the Green Meadows, and even down by the Smiling Pool, for the
voices of Sammy Jay and Blacky the Crow carried far, and at the sound of
them everybody hurried over, sure that something exciting was going on.

Presently Buster heard light footsteps, and peeping out, he saw Billy
Mink and Peter Rabbit and Jumper the Hare and Prickly Porky and Reddy
Fox and Jimmy Skunk. Even timid little Whitefoot the Wood Mouse was
where he could peer out and see without being seen. Of course, Chatterer
the Red Squirrel and Happy Jack the Gray Squirrel were there. There they
all sat in a great circle around him, each where he felt safe, but where
he could see, and every one of them laughing and making fun of Buster.

"Thief, thief, thief!" screamed Sammy until his throat was sore. The
worst of it was Buster knew that everybody knew that it was true. That
awful pail was proof of it.

"I wish I never had thought of berries," growled Buster to himself.




XXII

BUSTER BEAR HAS A FIT OF TEMPER


  A temper is a bad, bad thing
    When once it gets away.
  There's nothing quite at all like it
    To spoil a pleasant day.

Buster Bear was in a terrible temper. Yes, Sir, Buster Bear was having
the worst fit of temper ever seen in the Green Forest. And the worst
part of it all was that all his neighbors of the Green Forest and a
whole lot from the Green Meadows and the Smiling Pool were also there to
see it. It is bad enough to give way to temper when you are all alone,
and there is no one to watch you, but when you let temper get the best
of you right where others see you, oh, dear, dear, it certainly is a
sorry sight.

Now ordinarily Buster is one of the most good-natured persons in the
world. It takes a great deal to rouse his temper. He isn't one tenth so
quick tempered as Chatterer the Red Squirrel, or Sammy Jay, or Reddy
Fox. But when his temper is aroused and gets away from him, then watch
out! It seemed to Buster that he had had all that he could stand that
day and a little more. First had come the fright back there in the Old
Pasture. Then the pail had slipped down behind his ears and held fast,
so he had run all the way to the Green Forest with it hanging about his
neck. This was bad enough, for he knew just how funny he must look, and
besides, it was very uncomfortable. But to have Sammy Jay call everybody
within hearing to come and see him was more than he could stand. It
seemed to Buster as if everybody who lives in the Green Forest, on the
Green Meadows, or around the Smiling Brook, was sitting around his
hiding place, laughing and making fun of him. It was more than any
self-respecting Bear could stand.

With a roar of anger Buster Bear charged out of his hiding place. He
rushed this way and that way! He roared with all his might! He was very
terrible to see. Those who could fly, flew. Those who could climb,
climbed. And those who were swift of foot, ran. A few who could neither
fly nor climb nor run fast, hid and lay shaking and trembling for fear
that Buster would find them. In less time than it takes to tell about
it, Buster was alone. At least, he couldn't see any one.

[Illustration: Those who could fly, flew. Those who could climb,
climbed. _Page 112._]

Then he vented his temper on the tin pail. He cuffed at it and pulled at
it, all the time growling angrily. He lay down and clawed at it with his
hind feet. At last the handle broke, and he was free! He shook himself.
Then he jumped on the helpless pail. With a blow of a big paw he sent it
clattering against a tree. He tried to bite it. Then he once more fell
to knocking it this way and that way, until it was pounded flat, and no
one would ever have guessed that it had once been a pail.

Then, and not till then, did Buster recover his usual good nature.
Little by little, as he thought it all over, a look of shame crept into
his face. "I--I guess it wasn't the fault of that thing. I ought to have
known enough to keep my head out of it," he said slowly and
thoughtfully.

"You got no more than you deserve for stealing Farmer Brown's boy's
berries," said Sammy Jay, who had come back and was looking on from the
top of a tree. "You ought to know by this time that no good comes of
stealing."

Buster Bear looked up and grinned, and there was a twinkle in his eyes.
"You ought to know, Sammy Jay," said he. "I hope you'll always remember
it."

"Thief, thief, thief!" screamed Sammy, and flew away.




XXIII

FARMER BROWN'S BOY LUNCHES ON BERRIES


  When things go wrong in spite of you
  To smile's the best thing you can do--
  To smile and say, "I'm mighty glad
  They are no worse; they're not so bad!"

That is what Farmer Brown's boy said when he found that Buster Bear had
stolen the berries he had worked so hard to pick and then had run off
with the pail. You see, Farmer Brown's boy is learning to be something
of a philosopher, one of those people who accept bad things cheerfully
and right away see how they are better than they might have been. When
he had first heard some one in the bushes where he had hidden his pail
of berries, he had been very sure that it was one of the cows or young
cattle who live in the Old Pasture during the summer. He had been afraid
that they might stupidly kick over the pail and spill the berries, and
he had hurried to drive whoever it was away. It hadn't entered his head
that it could be anybody who would eat those berries.

When he had yelled and Buster Bear had suddenly appeared, struggling to
get off the pail which had caught over his head, Farmer Brown's boy had
been too frightened to even move. Then he had seen Buster tear away
through the brush even more frightened than he was, and right away his
courage had begun to come back.

"If he is so afraid of me, I guess I needn't be afraid of him," said
he. "I've lost my berries, but it is worth it to find out that he is
afraid of me. There are plenty more on the bushes, and all I've got to
do is to pick them. It might be worse."

He walked over to the place where the pail had been, and then he
remembered that when Buster ran away he had carried the pail with him,
hanging about his neck. He whistled. It was a comical little whistle of
chagrin as he realized that he had nothing in which to put more berries,
even if he picked them. "It's worse than I thought," cried he. "That
bear has cheated me out of that berry pie my mother promised me." Then
he began to laugh, as he thought of how funny Buster Bear had looked
with the pail about his neck, and then because, you know he is learning
to be a philosopher, he once more repeated, "It might have been worse.
Yes, indeed, it might have been worse. That bear might have tried to eat
me instead of the berries. I guess I'll go eat that lunch I left back by
the spring, and then I'll go home. I can pick berries some other day."

Chuckling happily over Buster Bear's great fright, Farmer Brown's boy
tramped back to the spring where he had left two thick sandwiches on a
flat stone when he started to save his pail of berries. "My, but those
sandwiches will taste good," thought he. "I'm glad they are big and
thick. I never was hungrier in my life. Hello!" This he exclaimed right
out loud, for he had just come in sight of the flat stone where the
sandwiches should have been, and they were not there. No, Sir, there
wasn't so much as a crumb left of those two thick sandwiches. You see,
Old Man Coyote had found them and gobbled them up while Farmer Brown's
boy was away.

But Farmer Brown's boy didn't know anything about Old Man Coyote. He
rubbed his eyes and stared everywhere, even up in the trees, as if he
thought those sandwiches might be hanging up there. They had disappeared
as completely as if they never had been, and Old Man Coyote had taken
care to leave no trace of his visit. Farmer Brown's boy gaped foolishly
this way and that way. Then, instead of growing angry, a slow smile
stole over his freckled face. "I guess some one else was hungry too," he
muttered. "Wonder who it was? Guess this Old Pasture is no place for me
to-day. I'll fill up on berries and then I'll go home."

So Farmer Brown's boy made his lunch on blueberries and then rather
sheepishly he started for home to tell of all the strange things that
had happened to him in the Old Pasture. Two or three times, as he
trudged along, he stopped to scratch his head thoughtfully. "I guess,"
said he at last, "that I'm not so smart as I thought I was, and I've got
a lot to learn yet."

This is the end of the adventures of Buster Bear in this book
because--guess why. Because Old Mr. Toad insists that I must write a
book about his adventures, and Old Mr. Toad is such a good friend of all
of us that I am going to do it.


