little knew how easily acquaintance who call themselves friends can
change when their interest comes in the slightest degree in competition
with their friendship.  Hurried by his impatient rival, and with his
hands so much benumbed that he could scarcely feel how to fix the arrow
in the string, he drew the bow.  The arrow was within a quarter of an
inch of Master Sweepstakes' mark, which was the nearest that had yet been
hit.  Hal seized his second arrow.  "If I have any luck--" said he.  But
just as he pronounced the word LUCK, and as he bent his bow, the string
broke in two, and the bow fell from his hands.

"There, it's all over with you!" cried Master Sweepstakes, with a
triumphant laugh.

"Here's my bow for him, and welcome," said Ben.

"No, no, sir," said Master Sweepstakes, "that is not fair; that's against
the regulation.  You may shoot with your own bow, if you choose it, or
you may not, just as you think proper; but you must not lend it, sir."

It was now Ben's turn to make his trial.  His first arrow was not
successful.  His second was exactly as near as Hal's first.  "You have
but one more," said Master Sweepstakes--"now for it!"  Ben, before he
ventured his last arrow, prudently examined the string of his bow; and,
as he pulled it to try its strength, it cracked.  Master Sweepstakes
clapped his hands with loud exultations and insulting laughter.  But his
laughter ceased when our provident hero calmly drew from his pocket an
excellent piece of whip cord.

"The everlasting whip cord, I declare!" exclaimed Hal, when he saw that
it was the very same that had tied up the parcel.  "Yes," said Ben, as he
fastened it to his bow, "I put it into my pocket, to-day, on purpose,
because I thought I might happen to want it."  He drew his bow the third
and last time.

"Oh, papa!" cried little Patty, as his arrow hit the mark, "it's the
nearest; is it not the nearest?"

Master Sweepstakes, with anxiety, examined the hit.  There could be no
doubt.  Ben was victorious!  The bow, the prize bow, was now delivered to
him; and Hal, as he looked at the whip-cord exclaimed, "How LUCKY this
whip-cord has been to you, Ben!"

"It is LUCKY, perhaps you mean, that he took care of it," said Mr.
Gresham.

"Ay," said Hal, "very true; he might well say, 'Waste not, want not.'  It
is a good thing to have two strings to one's bow."



OLD POZ.

          LUCY, daughter to the Justice.
          MRS. BUSTLE, landlady of the "Saracen's Head."
          JUSTICE HEADSTRONG.
          OLD MAN.
          WILLIAM, a Servant.


SCENE I.

The House of Justice Headstrong--a hall--Lucy watering some myrtles--A
servant behind the scenes is heard to say--

I tell you my master is not up.  You can't see him, so go about your
business, I say.

Lucy.  To whom are you speaking, William?  Who's that?

Will.  Only an old man, miss, with a complaint for my master.

Lucy.  Oh, then, don't send him away--don't send him away.

Will.  But master has not had his chocolate, ma'am.  He won't ever see
anybody before he drinks his chocolate, you know, ma'am.

Lucy.  But let the old man, then, come in here.  Perhaps he can wait a
little while.  Call him.                (Exit Servant.)

(Lucy sings, and goes on watering her myrtles; the servant shows in the
Old Man.)

Will.  You can't see my master this hour; but miss will let you stay
here.

Lucy (aside).  Poor old man! how he trembles as he walks.  (Aloud.) Sit
down, sit down.  My father will see you soon; pray sit down.

(He hesitates; she pushes a chair towards him.)

Lucy.  Pray sit down.                     (He sits down.)

Old Man.  You are very good, miss; very good.  (Lucy goes to her myrtles
again.)

Lucy.  Ah! I'm afraid this poor myrtle is quite dead--quite dead.
(The Old Man sighs, and she turns round.)

Lucy (aside).  I wonder what can make him sigh so!  (Aloud.)  My father
won't make you wait long.

Old M.  Oh, ma'am, as long as he pleases.  I'm in no haste--no haste.
It's only a small matter.

Lucy.  But does a small matter make you sigh so?

Old M.  Ah, miss; because, though it is a small matter in itself, it is
not a small matter to me (sighing again); it was my all, and I've lost
it.

Lucy.  What do you mean?  What have you lost?

Old M.  Why, miss--but I won't trouble you about it.

Lucy.  But it won't trouble me at all--I mean, I wish to hear it; so tell
it me.

Old M.  Why, miss, I slept last night at the inn here, in town--the
"Saracen's Head"--

Lucy (interrupts him).  Hark! there is my father coming downstairs;
follow me.  You may tell me your story as we go along.

Old M.  I slept at the "Saracen's Head," miss, and--
                                          (Exit, talking.)



SCENE II.

Justice Headstrong's Study.

(He appears in his nightgown and cap, with his gouty foot upon a stool--a
table and chocolate beside him--Lucy is leaning on the arm of his chair.)

Just.  Well, well, my darling, presently; I'll see him presently.

Lucy.  Whilst you are drinking your chocolate, papa?

Just.  No, no, no--I never see anybody till I have done my chocolate,
darling.  (He tastes his chocolate.)  There's no sugar in this, child.

Lucy.  Yes, indeed, papa.

Just.  No, child--there's NO sugar, I tell you; that poz!

Lucy.  Oh, but, papa, I assure you I put in two lumps myself.

Just.  There's NO sugar, I say; why will you contradict me, child, for
ever?  There's no sugar, I say.

(Lucy leans over him playfully, and with his teaspoon pulls out two lumps
of sugar.)

Lucy.  What's this, papa?

Just.  Pshaw! pshaw! pshaw!--it is not melted, child--it is the same as
no sugar!.--Oh, my foot, girl, my foot!--you kill me.  Go, go, I'm busy.
I've business to do.  Go and send William to me; do you hear, love?

Lucy.  And the old man, papa?

Just.  What old man?  I tell you what, I've been plagued ever since I was
awake, and before I was awake, about that old man.  If he can't wait, let
him go about his business.  Don't you know, child, I never see anybody
till I've drunk my chocolate; and I never will, if it were a duke--that's
poz!  Why, it has but just struck twelve; if he can't wait, he can go
about his business, can't he?

Lucy.  Oh, sir, he can wait.  It was not he who was impatient.  (She
comes back playfully.)  It was only I, papa; don't be angry.

Just.  Well, well, well (finishing his cup of chocolate, and pushing his
dish away); and at anyrate there was not sugar enough.  Send William,
send William, child; and I'll finish my own business, and then--
                (Exit Lucy, dancing, "And then!--and then!")

                        JUSTICE, alone.

Just.  Oh, this foot of mine!--(twinges)--Oh, this foot!  Ay, if Dr.
Sparerib could cure one of the gout, then, indeed, I should think
something of him; but, as to my leaving off my bottle of port, it's
nonsense; it's all nonsense; I can't do it; I can't, and won't, for all
the Dr. Spareribs in Christendom; that's poz!

                        Enter WILLIAM.

Just.  William--oh! ay! hey! what answer, pray, did you bring from the
"Saracen's Head"?  Did you see Mrs. Bustle herself, as I bid you?

Will.  Yes, sir, I saw the landlady herself; she said she would come up
immediately, sir.

Just.  Ah, that's well--immediately?

Will.  Yes, sir, and I hear her voice below now.

Just.  Oh, show her up; show Mrs. Bustle in.

         Enter Mrs. BUSTLE, the landlady of the "Saracen's Head."

Land.  Good morrow to your worship!  I'm glad to see your worship look so
purely.  I came up with all speed (taking breath).  Our pie is in the
oven; that was what you sent for me about, I take it.

Just.  True; true; sit down, good Mrs. Bustle, pray--

Land.  Oh, your worship's always very good (settling her apron).  I came
up just as I was--only threw my shawl over me.  I thought your worship
would excuse--I'm quite, as it were, rejoiced to see your worship look so
purely, and to find you up so hearty--

Just.  Oh, I'm very hearty (coughing), always hearty, and thankful for
it.  I hope to see many Christmas doings yet, Mrs. Bustle.  And so our
pie is in the oven, I think you say?

Land.  In the oven it is.  I put it in with my own hands; and if we have
but good luck in the baking, it will be as pretty a goose-pie--though I
say it that should not say it--as pretty a goose-pie as ever your worship
set your eyes upon.

Just.  Will you take a glass of anything this morning, Mrs. Bustle?--I
have some nice usquebaugh.

Land.  Oh, no, your worship!--I thank your worship, though, as much as if
I took it; but I just took my luncheon before I came up; or more proper,
MY SANDWICH, I should say, for the fashion's sake, to be sure.  A
LUNCHEON won't go down with nobody nowadays (laughs).  I expect hostler
and boots will be calling for their sandwiches just now (laughs again).
I'm sure I beg your worship's pardon for mentioning a LUNCHEON.

Just.  Oh, Mrs. Bustle, the word's a good word, for it means a good
thing--ha! ha! ha! (pulls out his watch); but pray, is it luncheon time.
Why, it's past one, I declare; and I thought I was up in remarkably good
time, too.

Land.  Well, and to be sure so it was, remarkably good time for your
worship; but folks in our way must be up betimes, you know.  I've been up
and about these seven hours!

Just.  (stretching).  Seven hours!

Land.  Ay, indeed--eight, I might say, for I am an early little body;
though I say it that should not say it--I AM an early little body.

Just.  An early little body, as you say, Mrs. Bustle; so I shall have my
goose-pie for dinner, hey?

Land.  For dinner, as sure as the clock strikes four--but I mustn't stay
prating, for it may be spoiling if I'm away; so I must wish your worship
a good morning.  (She curtsies.)

Just.  No ceremony--no ceremony; good Mrs. Bustle, your servant.

Enter William, to take away the chocolate.  The Landlady is putting on
her shawl.

Just.  You may let that man know, William, that I have dispatched my OWN
business, and am at leisure for his now (taking a pinch of snuff).  Hum!
pray, William (Justice leans back gravely), what sort of a looking fellow
is he, pray?

Will.  Most like a sort of travelling man, in my opinion, sir--or
something that way, I take it,

(At these words the landlady turns round inquisitively, and delays, that
she may listen, while she is putting on and pinning her shawl.)

Just.  Hum! a sort of a travelling man.  Hum! lay my books out open at
the title Vagrant; and, William, tell the cook that Mrs. Bustle promises
me the goose-pie for dinner.  Four o'clock, do you hear?  And show the
old man in now.

(The Landlady looks eagerly towards the door, as it opens, and exclaims,)

Land.  My old gentleman, as I hope to breathe!

                     Enter the OLD MAN.

(Lucy follows the Old Man on tiptoe--The Justice leans back and looks
consequential--The Landlady sets her arms akimbo--The Old Man starts as
he sees her.)

Just.  What stops you, friend?  Come forward, if you please.

Land.  (advancing).  So, sir, is it you, sir?  Ay, you little thought, I
warrant ye, to meet me here with his worship; but there you reckoned
without your host--Out of the frying-pan into the fire.

Just.  What is all this?  What is this?

Land.  (running on).  None of your flummery stuff will go down with his
worship no more than with me, I give you warning; so you may go further
and fare worse, and spare your breath to cool your porridge.

Just.  (waves his hand with dignity).  Mrs. Bustle, good Mrs. Bustle,
remember where you are.  Silence! silence!  Come forward, sir, and let me
hear what you have to say.

(The Old Man comes forward.)

Just.  Who and what may you be, friend, and what is your business with
me?

Land.  Sir, if your worship will give me leave--

                        (Justice makes a sign to her to be silent).

Old M.  Please, your worship, I am an old soldier.

Land.  (interrupting).  An old hypocrite, say.

Just.  Mrs. Bustle, pray, I desire, let the man speak.

Old M.  For these two years past--ever since, please your worship--I
wasn't able to work any longer; for in my youth I did work as well as the
best of them.

Land. (eager to interrupt).  You work--you--

Just.  Let him finish his story, I say.

Lucy.  Ay, do, do, papa, speak for him.  Pray, Mrs. Bustle--

Land.  (turning suddenly round to Lucy).  Miss, a good morrow to you,
ma'am.  I humbly beg your apologies for not seeing you sooner, Miss Lucy.
            (Justice nods to the Old Man, who goes on.)

Old Man.  But please your worship, it pleased God to take away the use of
my left arm; and since that I have never been able to work.

Land.  Flummery! flummery!

Just.  (angrily).  Mrs. Bustle, I have desired silence, and I will have
it, that's poz!  You shall have your turn presently.

Old M.  For these two years past (for why should I be ashamed to tell the
truth?) I have lived upon charity, and I scraped together a guinea and a
half and upwards, and I was travelling with it to my grandson, in the
north, with him to end my days--but (sighing)--

Just.  But what?  Proceed, pray, to the point.

Old M.  But last night I slept here in town, please your worship, at the
"Saracen's Head."

Land.  (in a rage).  At the "Saracen's Head"!  Yes, forsooth! none such
ever slept at the "Saracen's Head" afore, or shall afterwards, as long as
my name's Bustle, and the "Saracen's Head" is the "Saracen's Head."

Just.  Again! again!  Mrs. Landlady, this is downright--I have said you
should speak presently.  He SHALL speak first, since I've said it--that's
poz!  Speak on, friend.  You slept last night at the "Saracen's Head."

Old M.  Yes, please your worship, and I accuse nobody; but at night I had
my little money safe, and in the morning it was gone.

Land.  Gone!--gone, indeed, in my house! and this is the way I'm to be
treated!  Is it so?  I couldn't but speak, your worship, to such an
inhuman like, out o' the way, scandalous charge, if King George and all
the Royal Family were sitting in your worship's chair, beside you, to
silence me (turning to the Old Man).  And this is your gratitude,
forsooth!  Didn't you tell me that any hole in my house was good enough
for you, wheedling hypocrite?  And the thanks I receive is to call me and
mine a pack of thieves.

Old M.  Oh, no, no, no, NO--a pack of thieves, by no means.

Land.  Ay, I thought when _I_ came to speak we should have you upon your
marrow-bones in--

Just.  (imperiously).  Silence!  Five times have I commanded silence, and
five times in vain; and I won't command anything five times in vain--
THAT'S POZ!

Land.  (in a pet, aside).  Old Poz! (aloud).  Then, your worship, I don't
see any business I have to be waiting here; the folks want me at home
(returning and whispering).  Shall I send the goose-pie up, your worship,
if it's ready?

Just.  (with magnanimity).  I care not for the goose-pie, Mrs. Bustle.
Do not talk to me of goose-pies; this is no place to talk of pies.

Land.  Oh, for that matter, your worship knows best, to be sure.
                                      (Exit Landlady, angry.)



SCENE III.

                  JUSTICE HEADSTRONG, OLD MAN and LUCY.

Lucy.  Ah, now, I'm glad he can speak; now tell papa; and you need not be
afraid to speak to him, for he is very good-natured.  Don't contradict
him, though, because he told ME not.

Just.  Oh, darling, YOU shall contradict me as often as you please--only
not before I've drunk my chocolate, child--hey!  Go on, my good friend;
you see what it is to live in Old England, where, thank Heaven, the
poorest of His Majesty's subjects may have justice, and speak his mind
before the first in the land.  Now speak on; and you hear she tells you
that you need not be afraid of me.  Speak on.

Old M.  I thank your worship, I'm sure.

Just.  Thank me! for what, sir?  I won't be thanked for doing justice,
sir; so--but explain this matter.  You lost your money, hey, at the
"Saracen's Head"?  You had it safe last night, hey?--and you missed it
this morning?  Are you sure you had it safe at night?

Old M.  Oh, please your worship, quite sure; for I took it out and looked
at it just before I said my prayers.

Just.  You did--did ye so?--hum!  Pray, my good friend, where might you
put your money when you went to bed?

Old M.  Please, your worship, where I always put it--always--in my
tobacco-box.

Just.  Your tobacco-box!  I never heard of such a thing--to make a STRONG
BOX of a tobacco-box.  Ha! ha! ha! hum!--and you say the box and all were
gone in the morning?

Old M.  No, please your worship, no; not the box--the box was never
stirred from the place where I put it.  They left me the box.

Just.  Tut, tut, tut, man!--took the money and left the box?  I'll never
believe THAT!  I'll never believe that anyone could be such a fool.  Tut,
tut! the thing's impossible!  It's well you are not upon oath.

Old M.  If I were, please your worship, I should say the same; for it is
the truth.

Just.  Don't tell me, don't tell me; I say the thing is impossible.

Old M.  Please, your worship, here's the box.

Just.  (goes on without looking at it).  Nonsense! nonsense! it's no such
thing; it's no such thing, I say--no man would take the money and leave
the tobacco-box.  I won't believe it.  Nothing shall make me believe it
ever--that's poz.

Lucy (takes the box, and holds it up before her father's eyes).  You did
not see the box, did you, papa!

Just.  Yes, yes, yes, child--nonsense! it's all a lie from beginning to
end.  A man who tells one lie will tell a hundred.  All a lie! all a lie!

Old M.  If your worship would give me leave--

Just.  Sir, it does not signify--it does not signify!  I've said it, I've
said it, and that's enough to convince me, and I'll tell you more; if my
Lord Chief Justice of England told it to me, I would not believe it--
that's poz!

Lucy (still playing with the box).  But how comes the box here, I wonder?

Just.  Pshaw! pshaw! pshaw! darling.  Go to your dolls, darling, and
don't be positive--go to your dolls, and don't talk of what you don't
understand.  What can you understand, I want to know, of the law?

Lucy.  No, papa, I didn't mean about the law, but about the box; because,
if the man had taken it, how could it be here, you know, papa?

Just.  Hey, hey, what?  Why, what I say is this, that I don't dispute
that that box, that you hold in your hands, is a box; nay, for aught I
know, it may be a tobacco-box--but it's clear to me that if they left the
box they did not take the money; and how do you dare, sir, to come before
Justice Headstrong with a lie in your mouth; recollect yourself--I'll
give you time to recollect yourself.

                              (A pause.)

Just.  Well, sir;, and what do you say now about the box?

Old M.  Please, your worship, with submission, I CAN say nothing but what
I said before.

Just.  What, contradict me again, after I gave you time to recollect
yourself!  I've done with you; I have done.  Contradict me as often as
you please, but you cannot impose upon me; I defy you to impose upon me!

Old M.  Impose!

Just.  I know the law!--I know the law!--and I'll make you know it, too.
One hour I'll give you to recollect yourself, and if you don't give up
this idle story, I'll--I'll commit you as a vagrant--that's poz!  Go, go,
for the present.  William, take him into the servants' hall, do you
hear?--What, take the money and leave the box?  I'll never do it--that's
poz!

(Lucy speaks to the Old Man as he is going off.)

Lucy.  Don't be frightened! don't be frightened!--I mean, you tell the
truth, never be frightened.

Old M.  IF I tell the truth--(turning up his eyes).
                   (Old Man is still held back by the young lady.)

Lucy.  One moment--answer me one question--because of something that just
came into my head.  Was the box shut fast when you left it?

Old M.  No, miss, no!--open--it was open; for I could not find the lid in
the dark--my candle went out.  IF I tell the truth--oh!
                                             (Exit.)



SCENE IV.

                Justice's Study--the Justice is writing.

Old M.  Well!--I shall have but few days' more misery in this world!

Just.  (looks up).  Why! why--why then, why will you be so positive to
persist in a lie?  Take the money and leave the box!  Obstinate
blockhead!  Here, William (showing the committal), take this old
gentleman to Holdfast, the constable, and give him this warrant.

                  Enter Lucy, running, out of breath.

Lucy.  I've found it!  I've found it!  Here, old man; here's your money--
here it is all--a guinea and a half, and a shilling and a sixpence, just
as he said, papa.

                          Enter LANDLADY.

Land.  Oh la! your worship, did you ever hear the like?

Just.  I've heard nothing yet that I can understand.  First, have you
secured the thief, I say?

Lucy (makes signs to the landlady to be silent).  Yes, yes, yes!--we have
him safe--we have him prisoner.  Shall he come in, papa?

Just.  Yes, child, by all means; and now I shall hear what possessed him
to leave the box.  I don't understand--there's something deep in all
this; I don't understand it.  Now I do desire, Mrs. Landlady, nobody may
speak a single word whilst I am cross-examining the thief.

(Landlady puts her finger upon her lips--Everybody looks eagerly towards
the door.)

Re-enter Lucy, with a huge wicker cage in her hand, containing a magpie--
The Justice drops the committal out of his hand.

Just.  Hey!--what, Mrs. Landlady--the old magpie? hey?

Land.  Ay, your worship, my old magpie.  Who'd have thought it?  Miss was
very clever; it was she caught the thief.  Miss was very clever.

Old M.  Very good! very good!

Just.  Ay, darling, her father's own child!  How was it, child?  Caught
the thief, WITH THE MAINOUR, hey?  Tell us all; I will hear all--that's
poz!

Lucy.  Oh! then first I must tell you how I came to suspect Mr. Magpie.
Do you remember, papa, that day last summer, when I went with you to the
bowling-green, at the "Saracen's Head"?

Land.  Oh, of all days in the year! but I ask pardon, miss.

Lucy.  Well, that day I heard my uncle and another gentleman telling
stories of magpies hiding money; and they laid a wager about this old
magpie and they tried him--they put a shilling upon the table, and he ran
away with it, and hid it; so I thought that he might do so again, you
know, this time.

Just.  Right, right.  It's a pity, child, you are not upon the Bench; ha!
ha! ha!

Lucy.  And when I went to his old hiding place, there it was; but you
see, papa, he did not take the box.

Just.  No, no, no! because the thief was a magpie.  No MAN would have
taken the money and left the box.  You see I was right; no MAN would have
left the box, hey?

Lucy.  Certainly not, I suppose; but I'm so very glad, old man, that you
have obtained your money.

Just.  Well then, child, here--take my purse, and add that to it.  We
were a little too hasty with the committal--hey?

Land.  Ay, and I fear I was, too; but when one is touched about the
credit of one's house, one's apt to speak warmly.

Old M.  Oh, I'm the happiest old man alive!  You are all convinced that I
told you no lies.  Say no more--say no more.  I am the happiest man!
Miss, you have made me the happiest man alive!  Bless you for it!

Land.  Well now, I'll tell you what.  I know what I think--you must keep
that there magpie, and make a show of him, and I warrant he'll bring you
many an honest penny; for it's a TRUE STORY, and folks would like to hear
it, I hopes--

Just.  (eagerly).  And, friend, do you hear? you'll dine here today,
you'll dine here.  We have some excellent ale.  I will have you drink my
health--that's poz!--hey?  You'll drink my health, won't you--hey?

Old M.  (bows).  Oh! and the young lady's, if you please.

Just.  Ay, ay, drink her health--she deserves it.  Ay, drink my darling's
health.

Land.  And please your worship, it's the right time, I believe, to speak
of the goose-pie now; and a charming pie it is, and it's on the table.

Will.  And Mr. Smack, the curate, and Squire Solid, and the doctor, sir,
are come, and dinner is upon the table.

Just.  Then let us say no more; but do justice immediately to the goose-
pie; and, darling, put me in mind to tell this story after dinner.
(After they go out, the Justice stops.)

"Tell this story"--I don't know whether it tells well for me; but I'll
never be positive any more--THAT'S POZ!



THE MIMIC.



CHAPTER I.

Mr. and Mrs. Montague spent the summer of the year 1795 at Clifton with
their son Frederick, and their two daughters Sophia and Marianne.  They
had taken much care of the education of their children; nor were they
ever tempted, by any motive of personal convenience or temporary
amusement, to hazard the permanent happiness of their pupils.

Sensible of the extreme importance of early impressions, and of the
powerful influence of external circumstances in forming the characters
and the manners, they were now anxious that the variety of new ideas and
new objects which would strike the minds of their children should appear
in a just point of view.

"Let children see and judge for themselves," is often inconsiderately
said.  Where children see only a part they cannot judge of the whole; and
from the superficial view which they can have in short visits and
desultory conversation, they can form only a false estimate of the
objects of human happiness, a false notion of the nature of society, and
false opinions of characters.

For the above reasons, Mr. and Mrs. Montague were particularly cautious
in the choice of their acquaintances, as they were well aware that
whatever passed in conversation before children became part of their
education.

When they came to Clifton they wished to have a house entirely to
themselves, but, as they came late in the season, almost all the lodging
houses were full, and for a few weeks they were obliged to remain in a
house where some of the apartments were already occupied.

During the first fortnight they scarcely saw or heard anything of one of
the families who lodged on the same floor with them.  An elderly quaker,
and his sister Bertha, were their silent neighbours.  The blooming
complexion of the lady had indeed attracted the attention of the
children, as they caught a glimpse of her face when she was getting into
her carriage to go out upon the Downs.  They could scarcely believe that
she came to the Wells on account of her health.

Besides her blooming complexion, the delicate white of her garments had
struck them with admiration; and they observed that her brother carefully
guarded her dress from the wheel of the carriage, as he handed her in.
From this circumstance, and from the benevolent countenance of the old
gentleman, they concluded that he was very fond of his sister, and that
they were certainly very happy, except that they never spoke, and could
be seen only for a moment.

Not so the maiden lady who occupied the ground floor.  On the stairs, in
the passages, at her window, she was continually visible; and she
appeared to possess the art of being present in all these places at once.
Her voice was eternally to be heard, and it was not particularly
melodious.  The very first day she met Mrs. Montague's children on the
stairs, she stopped to tell Marianne that she was a charming dear, and a
charming little dear; to kiss her, to inquire her name, and to inform her
that her own name was "Mrs. Theresa Tattle," a circumstance of which
there was little danger of their long remaining in ignorance; for, in the
course of one morning, at least twenty single and as many double raps at
the door were succeeded by vociferations of "Mrs. Theresa Tattle's
servant!"  "Mrs. Theresa Tattle at home?"   "Mrs. Theresa Tattle not at
home!"

No person at the Wells was oftener at home and abroad than Mrs. Tattle.
She had, as she deemed it, the happiness to have a most extensive
acquaintance residing at Clifton.  She had for years kept a register of
arrivals.  She regularly consulted the subscriptions to the circulating
libraries, and the lists at the Ball and the Pump-rooms:  so that, with a
memory unencumbered with literature, and free from all domestic cares,
she contrived to retain a most astonishing and correct list of births,
deaths and marriages, together with all the anecdotes, amusing,
instructive, or scandalous, which are necessary to the conversation of a
water drinking place, and essential to the character of a "very pleasant
woman."

"A very pleasant woman," Mrs. Tattle was usually called; and, conscious
of her accomplishments, she was eager to introduce herself to the
acquaintance of her new neighbours; having, with her ordinary expedition,
collected from their servants, by means of her own, all that could be
known, or rather, all that could be told about them.  The name of
Montague, at all events, she knew was a good name, and justified in
courting the acquaintance.  She courted it first by nods, and becks and
smiles at Marianne whenever she met her; and Marianne, who was a very
little girl, began presently to nod and smile in return, persuaded that a
lady who smiled so much, could not be ill-natured.  Besides, Mrs.
Theresa's parlour door was sometimes left more than half open, to afford
a view of a green parrot.  Marianne sometimes passed very slowly by this
door.  One morning it was left quite wide open, when she stopped to say
"Pretty Poll"; and immediately Mrs. Tattle begged she would do her the
honour to walk in and see "Pretty Poll," at the same time taking the
liberty to offer her a piece of iced plum-cake.

The next day Mrs. Theresa Tattle did herself the honour to wait upon Mrs.
Montague, "to apologize for the liberty she taken in inviting Mrs.
Montague's charming Miss Marianne into her apartment to see Pretty Poll,
and for the still greater liberty she had taken in offering her a piece
of plum-cake--inconsiderate creature that she was!--which might possibly
have disagreed with her, and which certainly were liberties she never
should have been induced to take, if she had not been unaccountably
bewitched by Miss Marianne's striking though highly flattering
resemblance to a young gentleman (an officer) with whom she had danced,
now nearly twelve years ago, of the name of Montague, a most respectable
young man, and of a most respectable family, with which, in a remote
degree, she might presume to say, she herself was someway connected,
having the honour to be nearly related to the Joneses of Merionethshire,
who were cousins to the Mainwarings of Bedfordshire, who married into the
family of the Griffiths, the eldest branch of which, she understood, had
the honour to be cousin-german to Mr. Montague; on which account she had
been impatient to pay a visit, so likely to be productive of most
agreeable consequences, by the acquisition of an acquaintance whose
society must do her infinite honour."

Having thus happily accomplished her first visit, there seemed little
probability of escaping Mrs. Tattle's further acquaintance.  In the
course of the first week she only hinted to Mr. Montague that "some
people thought his system of education rather odd; that she should be
obliged to him if he would, some time or other, when he had nothing else
to do, just sit down and make her understand his notions, that she might
have something to say to her acquaintance, as she always wished to have
when she heard any friend attacked, or any friend's opinions."

Mr. Montague declining to sit down and make this lady understand a system
of education only to give her something to say, and showing unaccountable
indifference about the attacks with which he was threatened, Mrs. Tattle
next addressed herself to Mrs. Montague, prophesying, in a most serious
whisper, "that the charming Miss Marianne would shortly and inevitably
grow quite crooked, if she were not immediately provided with a back-
board, a French dancing-master, and a pair of stocks."

This alarming whisper could not, however, have a permanent effect upon
Mrs. Montague's understanding, because three days afterwards Mrs.
Theresa, upon the most anxious inspection, entirely mistook the just and
natural proportions of the hip and shoulder.

This danger vanishing, Mrs. Tattle presently, with a rueful length of
face, and formal preface, "hesitated to assure Mrs. Montague, that she
was greatly distressed about her daughter Sophy; that she was convinced
her lungs were affected; and that she certainly ought to drink the waters
morning and evening; and above all things, must keep one of the patirosa
lozenges constantly in her mouth, and directly consult Dr. Cardamum, the
best physician in the world, and the person she would send for herself
upon her death-bed; because, to her certain knowledge, he had recovered a
young lady, a relation of her own, after she had lost one whole GLOBE* of
her lungs."

*Lobe.

The medical opinion of a lady of so much anatomical precision could not
have much weight.  Neither was this universal adviser more successful in
an attempt to introduce a tutor to Frederick, who, she apprehended, must
want some one to perfect him in the Latin and Greek, and dead languages,
of which, she observed, it would be impertinent for a woman to talk; only
she might venture to repeat what she had heard said by good authority,
that a competency of the dead tongues could be had nowhere but at a
public school, or else from a private tutor who had been abroad (after
the advantage of a classical education, finished in one of the
universities) with a good family; without which introduction it was idle
to think of reaping solid advantages from any continental tour; all which
requisites, from personal knowledge, she could aver to be concentrated in
the gentleman she had the honour to recommend, as having been tutor to a
young nobleman, who had now no further occasion for him, having,
unfortunately for himself and his family, been killed in an untimely
duel.

All Mrs. Theresa Tattle's suggestions being lost upon these stoical
parents, her powers were next tried upon the children, and her success
soon became apparent.  On Sophy, indeed, she could not make any
impression, though she had expended on her some of her finest strokes of
flattery.  Sophy, though very desirous of the approbation of her friends,
was not very desirous of winning the favour of strangers.  She was about
thirteen--that dangerous age at which ill educated girls, in their
anxiety to display their accomplishments, are apt to become dependent for
applause upon the praise of every idle visitor; when the habits not being
formed, and the attention being suddenly turned to dress and manners,
girls are apt to affect and imitate, indiscriminately, everything that
they conceive to be agreeable.

Sophy, whose taste had been cultivated at the same time with her powers
of reasoning, was not liable to fall into these errors.  She found that
she could please those whom she wished to please, without affecting to be
anything but what she really was; and her friends listened to what she
said, though she never repeated the sentiments, or adopted the phrases,
which she might easily have copied from the conversation of those who
were older or more fashionable than herself.

This word FASHIONABLE, Mrs. Theresa Tattle knew, had usually a great
effect, even at thirteen; but she had not observed that it had much power
upon Sophy; nor were her remarks concerning grace and manners much
attended to.  Her mother had taught Sophy that it was best to let herself
alone, and not to distort either her person or her mind in acquiring
grimace, which nothing but the fashion of the moment can support, and
which is always detected and despised by people of real good sense and
politeness.

"Bless me!" said Mrs. Tattle, to herself, "if I had such a tall daughter,
and so unformed, before my eyes from morning to night, it would certainly
break my poor heart.  Thank heaven, I am not a mother! if I were, Miss
Marianne for me!"

Miss Marianne had heard so often from Mrs. Tattle that she was very
charming, that she could not help believing it; and from being a very
pleasing, unaffected little girl, she in a short time grew so conceited,
that she could neither speak, look, nor be silent without imagining that
everybody was, or ought to be, looking at her; and when Mrs. Theresa saw
that Mrs. Montague looked very grave upon these occasions, she, to repair
the ill she had done, would say, after praising Marianne's hair or her
eyes, "Oh, but little ladies should never think about their beauty, you
know.  Nobody loves anybody for being handsome, but for being good."
People must think children are very silly, or else they can never have
reflected upon the nature of belief in their own minds, if they imagine
that children will believe the words that are said to them, by way of
moral, when the countenance, manner, and every concomitant circumstance
tell them a different tale.  Children are excellent physiognomists--they
quickly learn the universal language of looks; and what is said OF them
always makes a greater impression than what is said TO them, a truth of
which those prudent people surely cannot be aware who comfort themselves,
and apologize to parents, by saying, "Oh, but I would not say so and so
to the child."

Mrs. Theresa had seldom said to Frederick Montague, "that he had a vast
deal of drollery, and was a most incomparable mimic;" but she had said so
of him in whispers, which magnified the sound to his imagination, if not
to his ear.  He was a boy of much vivacity, and had considerable
abilities; but his appetite for vulgar praise had not yet been surfeited.
Even Mrs. Theresa Tattle's flattery pleased him, and he exerted himself
for her entertainment so much that he became quite a buffoon.  Instead of
observing characters and manners, that he might judge of them, and form
his own, he now watched every person he saw, that he might detect some
foible, or catch some singularity in their gesture or pronunciation,
which he might successfully mimic.

Alarmed by the rapid progress of these evils, Mr. and Mrs. Montague, who,
from the first day that they had been honoured with Mrs. Tattle's visit,
had begun to look out for new lodgings, were now extremely impatient to
decamp.  They were not people who, from the weak fear of offending a
silly acquaintance, would hazard the happiness of their family.  They had
heard of a house in the country which was likely to suit them, and they
determined to go directly to look at it.  As they were to be absent all
day, they foresaw that their officious neighbour would probably interfere
with their children.  They did not choose to exact any promise from them
which they might be tempted to break, and therefore they only said at
parting, "If Mrs. Theresa Tattle should ask you to come to her, do as you
think proper."

Scarcely had Mrs. Montague's carriage got out of hearing when a note was
brought, directed to "Frederick Montague, Junior, Esq.," which he
immediately opened, and read as follows:--

"Mrs. Theresa Tattle presents her very best compliments to the
entertaining Mr. Frederick Montague; she hopes he will have the charity
to drink tea with her this evening, and bring his charming sister, Miss
Marianne, with him, as Mrs. Theresa will be quite alone with a shocking
headache, and is sensible her nerves are affected; and Dr. Cardamum says
that (especially in Mrs. T. T.'s case) it is downright death to nervous
patients to be alone an instant.  She therefore trusts Mr. Frederick will
not refuse to come and make her laugh.  Mrs. Theresa has taken care to
provide a few macaroons for her little favourite, who said she was
particularly fond of them the other day.  Mrs. Theresa hopes they will
all come at six, or before, not forgetting Miss Sophy, if she will
condescend to be of the party."

At the first reading of this note, "the entertaining" Mr. Frederick, and
the "charming" Miss Marianne laughed heartily, and looked at Sophy, as if
they were afraid that she should think it possible they could like such
gross flattery; but upon a second perusal, Marianne observed that it
certainly was very good-natured of Mrs. Theresa to remember the
macaroons; and Frederick allowed that it was wrong to laugh at the poor
woman because she had the headache.  Then twisting the note in his
fingers, he appealed to Sophy:--

"Well, Sophy, leave off drawing for an instant," said Frederick, "and
tell us what answer can we send?"

"Can!--we can send what answer we please."

"Yes, I know that," said Frederick.  "I would refuse if I could; but we
ought not to do anything rude, should we?  So I think we might as well
go, because we could not refuse, if we would, I say."

"You have made such confusion," replied Sophy, "between 'couldn't' and
'wouldn't' and 'shouldn't,' that I can't understand you; surely they are
all different things."

"Different! no," cried Frederick--"could, would, should, might, and
ought, are all the same thing in the Latin grammar; all of 'em signs of
the potential mood, you know."

Sophy, whose powers of reasoning were not to be confounded, even by
quotations from the Latin grammar, looked up soberly from her drawing,
and answered "that very likely those words might be signs of the same
thing in the Latin grammar, but she believed that they meant perfectly
different things in real life."

"That's just as people please," said her sophistical brother.  "You know
words mean nothing in themselves.  If I choose to call my hat my
cadwallader, you would understand me just as well, after I had once
explained it to you, that by cadwallader I meant this black thing that I
put upon my head; cadwallader and hat would then be just the same thing
to you."

"Then why have two words for the same thing?" said Sophy; "and what has
this to do with 'could' and 'should'?  You wanted to prove--"

"I wanted to prove," interrupted Frederick, "that it's not worth while to
dispute for two hours about two words.  Do keep to the point, Sophy, and
don't dispute with me."

"I was not disputing, I was reasoning."

"Well, reasoning or disputing.  Women have no business to do either; for,
how should they know how to chop logic like men?"

At this contemptuous sarcasm upon her sex, Sophy's colour rose.

"There!" cried Frederick, exulting, "now we shall see a philosopheress in
a passion; I'd give sixpence, half-price, for a harlequin entertainment,
to see Sophy in a passion.  Now, Marianne, look at her brush dabbing so
fast in the water!"

Sophy, who could not easily bear to be laughed at, with some little
indignation, said, "Brother, I wish--"

"There! there!" cried Frederick, pointing to the colour which rose in her
cheeks almost to her temples--"rising! rising! rising! look at the
thermometer! blood heat! blood! fever heat! boiling water heat!
Marianne."

"Then," said Sophy, smiling, "you should stand a little farther off, both
of you.  Leave the thermometer to itself a little while.  Give it time to
cool.  It will come down to 'temperate' by the time you look again."

"Oh, brother!" cried Marianne, "she's so good-humoured, don't tease her
any more, and don't draw heads upon her paper, and don't stretch her
india-rubber, and don't let us dirty any more of her brushes.  See! the
sides of her tumbler are all manner of colours."

"Oh, I only mixed red, blue, green and yellow, to show you, Marianne,
that all colours mixed together make white.  But she is temperate now,
and I won't plague her; she shall chop logic, if she likes it, though she
is a woman."

"But that's not fair, brother," said Marianne, "to say 'woman' in that
way.  I'm sure Sophy found out how to tie that difficult knot, which papa
showed us yesterday, long before you did, though you are a man."

"Not long," said Frederick.  "Besides, that was only a conjuring trick."

"It was very ingenious, though," said Marianne; "and papa said so.
Besides, she understood the 'Rule of Three,' which was no conjuring
trick, better than you did, though she is a woman; and she can reason,
too, mamma says."

"Very well, let her reason away," said the provoking wit.  "All I have to
say is, that she'll never be able to make a pudding."

"Why not, pray, brother?" inquired Sophy, looking up again, very gravely.

"Why, you know papa himself, the other day at dinner, said that the woman
who talks Greek and Latin as well as I do, is a fool after all; and that
she had better have learned something useful; and Mrs. Tattle said, she'd
answer for it she did not know how to make a pudding."

"Well! but I am not talking Greek and Latin, am I?"

"No, but you are drawing, and that's the same thing."

"The same thing!  Oh, Frederick!" said little Marianne, laughing.

"You may laugh; but I say it is the same sort of thing.  Women who are
always drawing and reasoning, never know how to make puddings.  Mrs.
Theresa Tattle said so, when I showed her Sophy's beautiful drawing
yesterday."

"Mrs. Theresa Tattle might say so," replied Sophy, calmly; "but I do not
perceive the reason, brother, why drawing should prevent me from learning
how to make a pudding."

