
"Yes, indeed, madam--very sorry."

"Then make that sorry of use to you, Cecilia, and fix it steadily in your
thoughts, as you hope to be good and happy, that if you suffer yourself
to yield to your passion upon every occasion, anger and its consequences
will become familiar to your mind; and, in the same proportion, your
sense of shame will be weakened, till what you began with doing from
sudden impulse you will end with doing from habit and choice:  then you
would, indeed, according to our definition, have a bad heart."

"Oh, madam! I hope--I am sure I never shall."

"No, indeed, Cecilia; I do, indeed, believe that you never will; on the
contrary, I think that you have a very good disposition, and what is of
infinitely more consequence to you, an active desire of improvement.
Show me that you have as much perseverance as you have candour, and I
shall not despair of your becoming everything that I could wish."

Here Cecilia's countenance brightened, and she ran up the steps in almost
as high spirits as she ran down them in the morning.

"Good-night to you, Cecilia," said Mrs. Villars, as she was crossing the
hall.  "Good-night to you, madam," said Cecilia; and she ran upstairs to
bed.  She could not go to sleep; but she lay awake, reflecting upon the
events of the preceding day, and forming resolutions for the future, at
the same time that she had resolved, and resolved without effect, she
wished to give her mind some more powerful motive.  Ambition she knew to
be its most powerful incentive.  "Have I not," said she to herself,
"already won the prize of application, and cannot the same application
procure me a much higher prize?  Mrs. Villars said that if the prize had
been promised to the most amiable, it would not have been given to me.
Perhaps it would not yesterday, perhaps it might not to-morrow; but that
is no reason that I should despair of ever deserving it.".

In consequence of this reasoning, Cecilia formed a design of proposing to
her companions that they should give a prize, the first of the ensuing
month (the lst of June), to the most amiable.  Mrs. Villars applauded the
scheme, and her companions adopted it with the greatest alacrity.

"Let the prize," said they, "be a bracelet of our own hair;" and
instantly their shining scissors were produced, and each contributed a
lock of their hair.  They formed the most beautiful gradation of colours,
from the palest auburn to the brightest black.  Who was to have the
honour of plaiting them? was now the question.  Caroline begged that she
might, as she could plait very neatly, she said.  Cecilia, however, was
equally sure that she could do it much better; and a dispute would have
inevitably ensued, if Cecilia, recollecting herself just as her colour
rose to scarlet, had not yielded--yielded, with no very good grace
indeed, but as well as could be expected for the first time.  For it is
habit which confers ease; and without ease, even in moral actions, there
can be no grace.

The bracelet was plaited in the neatest manner by Caroline, finished
round the edge with silver twist, and on it was worked, in the smallest
silver letters, this motto, "TO THE MOST AMIABLE."  The moment it was
completed, everybody begged to try it on.  It fastened with little silver
clasps, and as it was made large enough for the eldest girls, it was too
large for the youngest.  Of this they bitterly complained, and
unanimously entreated that it might be cut to fit them.

"How foolish!" exclaimed Cecilia; "don't you perceive that if any of you
win it, you have nothing to do but to put the clips a little further from
the edge, but if we get it, we can't make it larger?"

"Very true," said they; "but you need not to have called us foolish,
Cecilia."

It was by such hasty and unguarded expressions as these that Cecilia
offended.  A slight difference in the manner makes a very material one in
the effect.  Cecilia lost more love by general petulance than she could
gain by the greatest particular exertions.

How far she succeeded in curing herself of this defect--how far she
became deserving of the bracelet, and to whom the bracelet was given--
shall be told in the History of the First of June.

                               -----

The First of June was now arrived, and all the young competitors were in
a state of the most anxious suspense.  Leonora and Cecilia continued to
be the foremost candidates.  Their quarrel had never been finally
adjusted, and their different pretensions now retarded all thoughts of a
reconciliation.  Cecilia, though she was capable of acknowledging any of
her faults in public before all her companions, could not humble herself
in private to Leonora.  Leonora was her equal; they were her inferiors,
and submission is much easier to a vain mind, where it appears to be
voluntary, than when it is the necessary tribute to justice or candour.
So strongly did Cecilia feel this truth, that she even delayed making any
apology, or coming to any explanation with Leonora, until success should
once more give her the palm.

"If I win the bracelet, to-day," said she to herself, "I will solicit the
return of Leonora's friendship; it will be more valuable to me than even
the bracelet, and at such a time, and asked in such a manner, she surely
cannot refuse it to me."  Animated with this hope of a double triumph,
Cecilia canvassed with the most zealous activity.  By constant attention
and exertion she had considerably abated the violence of her temper, and
changed the course of her habits.  Her powers of pleasing were now
excited, instead of her abilities to excel; and, if her talents appeared
less brilliant, her character was acknowledged to be more amiable.  So
great an influence upon our manners and conduct have the objects of our
ambition.

Cecilia was now, if possible, more than ever desirous of doing what was
right, but she had not yet acquired sufficient fear of doing wrong.  This
was the fundamental error of her mind; it arose in a great measure from
her early education.  Her mother died when she was very young; and though
her father had supplied her place in the best and kindest manner, he had
insensibly infused into his daughter's mind a portion of that
enterprising, independent spirit which he justly deemed essential to the
character of her brother.  This brother was some years older than
Cecilia, but he had always been the favourite companion of her youth.
What her father's precepts inculcated, his example enforced; and even
Cecilia's virtues consequently became such as were more estimable in a
man than desirable in a female. All small objects and small errors she
had been taught to disregard as trifles; and her impatient disposition
was perpetually leading her into more material faults; yet her candour in
confessing these, she had been suffered to believe, was sufficient
reparation and atonement.

Leonora, on the contrary, who had been educated by her mother in a manner
more suited to her sex, had a character and virtues more peculiar to a
female.  Her judgment had been early cultivated, and her good sense
employed in the regulation of her conduct.  She had been habituated to
that restraint, which, as a woman, she was to expect in life, and early
accustomed to yield.  Compliance in her seemed natural and graceful; yet
notwithstanding the gentleness of her temper, she was in reality more
independent than Cecilia.  She had more reliance upon her own judgment,
and more satisfaction in her own approbation.  The uniform kindness of
her manner, the consistency and equality of her character, had fixed the
esteem and passive love of her companions.

By passive love we mean that species of affection which makes us
unwilling to offend rather than anxious to oblige, which is more a habit
than an emotion of the mind.  For Cecilia her companions felt active
love, for she was active in showing her love to them.

Active love arises spontaneously in the mind, after feeling particular
instances of kindness, without reflection on the past conduct or general
character.  It exceeds the merits of its object, and is connected with a
feeling of generosity, rather than with a sense of justice.

Without determining which species of love is the most flattering to
others, we can easily decide which is the most agreeable feeling to our
minds.  We give our hearts more credit for being generous than for being
just; and we feel more self-complacency when we give our love
voluntarily, than when we yield it as a tribute which we cannot withhold.
Though Cecilia's companions might not know all this in theory, they
proved it in practice; for they loved her in a much higher proportion to
her merits than they loved Leonora.

Each of the young judges were to signify their choice by putting a red or
a white shell into a vase prepared for the purpose.  Cecilia's colour was
red, Leonora's white.

In the morning nothing was to be seen but these shells; nothing talked of
but the long expected event of the evening.  Cecilia, following Leonora's
example, had made it a point of honour not to inquire of any individual
her vote, previously to their final determination.

They were both sitting together in Louisa's room.  Louisa was recovering
from the measles.  Everyone during her illness had been desirous of
attending her; but Leonora and Cecilia were the only two that were
permitted to see her, as they alone had had the distemper.  They were
both assiduous in their care of Louisa, but Leonora's want of exertion to
overcome any disagreeable feelings of sensibility often deprived her of
presence of mind, and prevented her from being so constantly useful as
Cecilia.  Cecilia, on the contrary, often made too much noise and bustle
with her officious assistance, and was too anxious to invent amusements
and procure comforts for Louisa, without perceiving that illness takes
away the power of enjoying them.

As she was sitting at the window in the morning, exerting herself to
entertain Louisa, she heard the voice of an old peddler who often used to
come to the house.  Downstairs they ran immediately, to ask Mrs. Villars'
permission to bring him into the hall.  Mrs. Villars consented, and away
Cecilia ran to proclaim the news to her companions.  Then, first
returning into the hall, she found the peddler just unbuckling his box,
and taking it off his shoulders.

"What would you be pleased to want, miss?" said the peddler; "I've all
kinds of tweezer-cases, rings, and lockets of all sorts," continued he,
opening all the glittering drawers successively.

"Oh!" said Cecilia, shutting the drawer of lockets which tempted her
most, "these are not the things which I want.  Have you any china
figures? any mandarins?"

"Alack-a-day, miss, I had a great stock of that same chinaware; but now
I'm quite out of them kind of things; but I believe," said he, rummaging
one of the deepest drawers, "I believe I have one left, and here it is."

"Oh, that is the very thing! what's its price?"

"Only three shillings, ma'am."  Cecilia paid the money, and was just
going to carry off the mandarin, when the peddler took out of his great-
coat pocket a neat mahogany case.  It was about a foot long, and fastened
at each end by two little clasps.  It had besides, a small lock in the
middle.

"What is that?" said Cecilia, eagerly.

"It's only a china figure, miss, which I am going to carry to an elderly
lady, who lives nigh hand, and who is mighty fond of such things."

"Could you let me look at it?"

"And welcome, miss," said he, and opened the case.

"Oh, goodness! how beautiful!" exclaimed Cecilia.

It was a figure of Flora, crowned with roses, and carrying a basket of
flowers in her hand.  Cecilia contemplated it with delight.  "How I
should like to give this to Louisa!" said she to herself; and, at last,
breaking silence, "Did you promise it to the old lady?"

"Oh, no, miss, I didn't promise it--she never saw it; and if so be that
you'd like to take it, I'd make no more words about it."

"And how much does it cost?"

"Why, miss, as to that, I'll let you have it for half-a-guinea."

Cecilia immediately produced the box in which she kept her treasure, and,
emptying it upon the table, she began to count the shillings.  Alas!
there were but six shillings.  "How provoking!" said she; "then I can't
have it.  Where's the mandarin?  Oh, I have it," said she, taking it up,
and looking at it with the utmost disgust.  "Is this the same that I had
before?"

"Yes, miss, the very same," replied the peddler, who, during this time,
had been examining the little box out of which Cecilia had taken her
money--it was of silver.  "Why, ma'am," said he, "since you've taken such
a fancy to the piece, if you've a mind to make up the remainder of the
money, I will take this here little box, if you care to part with it."

Now this box was a keepsake from Leonora to Cecilia.  "No," said Cecilia
hastily, blushing a little, and stretching out her hand to receive it.

"Oh, miss!" said he, returning it carelessly, "I hope there's no offence.
I meant but to serve you, that's all.  Such a rare piece of china-work
has no cause to go a-begging," added he.  Then, putting the Flora
deliberately into the case, and turning the key with a jerk, he let it
drop into his pocket; when, lifting up his box by the leather straps, he
was preparing to depart.

"Oh, stay one minute!" said Cecilia, in whose mind there had passed a
very warm conflict during the peddler's harangue.  "Louisa would so like
this Flora," said she, arguing with herself.  "Besides, it would be so
generous in me to give it to her instead of that ugly mandarin; that
would be doing only common justice, for I promised it to her, and she
expects it.  Though, when I come to look at this mandarin, it is not even
so good as hers was.  The gilding is all rubbed off, so that I absolutely
must buy this for her.  Oh, yes! I will, and she will be so delighted!
and then everybody will say it is the prettiest thing they ever saw, and
the broken mandarin will be forgotten for ever."

Here Cecilia's hand moved, and she was just going to decide:  "Oh, but
stop," said she to herself, "consider--Leonora gave me this box, and it
is a keepsake.  However, we have now quarrelled, and I dare say that she
would not mind my parting with it.  I'm sure that I should not care if
she was to give away my keepsake, the smelling-bottle, or the ring which
I gave her.  Then what does it signify?  Besides, is it not my own? and
have I not a right to do what I please with it?"

At this moment, so critical for Cecilia, a party of her companions opened
the door.  She knew that they came as purchasers, and she dreaded her
Flora's becoming the prize of some higher bidder.  "Here," said she,
hastily putting the box into the peddler's hand, without looking at it;
"take it, and give me the Flora."  Her hand trembled, though she snatched
it impatiently.  She ran by, without seeming to mind any of her
companions.

Let those who are tempted to do wrong by the hopes of future
gratification, or the prospect of certain concealment and impunity,
remember that, unless they are totally depraved, they bear in their own
hearts a monitor, who will prevent their enjoying what they ill obtained.

In vain Cecilia ran to the rest of her companions, to display her
present, in hopes that the applause of others would restore her own self-
complacency; in vain she saw the Flora pass in due pomp from hand to
hand, each vying with the other in extolling the beauty of the gift and
the generosity of the giver.  Cecilia was still displeased with herself,
with them, and even with their praise.  From Louisa's gratitude, however,
she yet expected much pleasure, and immediately she ran upstairs to her
room.

In the meantime, Leonora had gone into the hall to buy a bodkin; she had
just broken hers.  In giving her change, the peddler took out of his
pocket, with some halfpence, the very box which Cecilia had sold to him.
Leonora did not in the least suspect the truth, for her mind was above
suspicion; and besides, she had the utmost confidence in Cecilia.

"I should like to have that box," said she, "for it is like one of which
I was very fond."

The peddler named the price, and Leonora took the box.  She intended to
give it to little Louisa.  On going to her room she found her asleep, and
she sat softly down by her bedside.  Louisa opened her eyes.

"I hope I didn't disturb you," said Leonora.

"Oh, no.  I didn't hear you come in; but what have you got there?"

"Only a little box; would you like to have it?  I bought on purpose for
you, as I thought perhaps it would please you, because it's like that
which I gave Cecilia."

"Oh, yes! that out of which she used to give me Barbary drops.  I am very
much obliged to you; I always thought that exceedingly pretty, and this,
indeed, is as like it as possible.  I can't unscrew it; will you try?"

Leonora unscrewed it.  "Goodness!" exclaimed Louisa, "this must be
Cecilia's box.  Look, don't you see a great L at the bottom of it?"

Leonora's colour changed.  "Yes," she replied calmly, "I see that; but it
is no proof that it is Cecilia's.  You know that I bought this box just
now of the peddler."

"That may be," said Louisa; "but I remember scratching that L with my own
needle, and Cecilia scolded me for it, too.  Do go and ask her if she has
lost her box--do," repeated Louisa, pulling her by the ruffle, as she did
not seem to listen.

Leonora, indeed, did not hear, for she was lost in thought.  She was
comparing circumstances, which had before escaped her attention.  She
recollected that Cecilia had passed her as she came into the hall,
without seeming to see her, but had blushed as she passed.  She
remembered that the peddler appeared unwilling to part with the box, and
was going to put it again in his pocket with the halfpence.  "And why
should he keep it in his pocket, and not show it with his other things?"
Combining all these circumstances, Leonora had no longer any doubt of the
truth, for though she had honourable confidence in her friends, she had
too much penetration to be implicitly credulous.

"Louisa," she began, but at this instant she heard a step, which, by its
quickness, she knew to be Cecilia's, coming along the passage.  "If you
love me, Louisa," said Leonora, "say nothing about the box."

"Nay, but why not?  I daresay she had lost it."

"No, my dear, I'm afraid she has not."  Louisa looked surprised.  "But I
have reasons for desiring you not to say anything about it."

"Well, then, I won't, indeed."

Cecilia opened the door, came forward smiling, as if secure of a good
reception, and taking the Flora out of the case, she placed it on the
mantlepiece, opposite to Louisa's bed.  "Dear, how beautiful!" cried
Louisa, starting up.

"Yes," said Cecilia, "and guess who it's for."

"For me, perhaps!" said the ingenuous Louisa.

"Yes, take it, and keep it, for my sake.  You know that I broke your
mandarin."

"Oh, but this is a great deal prettier and larger than that."

"Yes, I know it is; and I meant that it should be so.  I should only have
done what I was bound to do if I had only given you a mandarin."

"Well," replied Louisa, "and that would have been enough, surely; but
what a beautiful crown of roses! and then that basket of flowers! they
almost look as if I could smell them.  Dear Cecilia, I'm very much
obliged to you; but I won't take it by way of payment for the mandarin
you broke; for I'm sure you could not help that, and, besides, I should
have broken it myself by this time.  You shall give it to me entirely;
and as your keepsake, I'll keep it as long as I live."

Louisa stopped short and coloured; the word keepsake recalled the box to
her mind, and all the train of ideas which the Flora had banished.
"But," said she, looking up wistfully in Cecilia's face, and holding the
Flora doubtfully, "did you--"

Leonora, who was just quitting the room, turned her head back, and gave
Louisa a look, which silenced her.

Cecilia was so infatuated with her vanity, that she neither perceived
Leonora's sign nor Louisa's confusion, but continued showing off her
present, by placing it in various situations, till at length she put it
into the case, and laying it down with an affected carelessness upon the
bed, "I must go now, Louisa.  Good-bye," said she, running up and kissing
her; "but I'll come again presently," then, clapping the door after her
she went.  But as soon as the formentation of her spirits subsided, the
sense of shame, which had been scarcely felt when mixed with so many
other sensations, rose uppermost in her mind.  "What!" said she to
herself, "is it possible that I have sold what I promised to keep for
ever? and what Leonora gave me?  and I have concealed it too, and have
been making a parade of my generosity.  Oh! what would Leonora, what
would Louisa--what would everybody think of me, if the truth were known?"

Humiliated and grieved by these reflections, Cecilia began to search in
her own mind for some consoling idea.  She began to compare her conduct
with that of others of her own age; and at length, fixing her comparison
upon her brother George, as the companion of whom, from her infancy, she
had been habitually the most emulous, she recollected that an almost
similar circumstance had once happened to him, and that he had not only
escaped disgrace, but had acquired glory, by an intrepid confession of
his fault.  Her father's word to her brother, on the occasion, she also
perfectly recollected.

"Come to me, George," he said holding out his hand, "you are a generous,
brave boy:  they who dare to confess their faults will make great and
good men."

These were his words; but Cecilia, in repeating them to herself, forgot
to lay that emphasis on the word MEN, which would have placed it in
contradistinction to the word WOMEN.  She willingly believed that the
observation extended equally to both sexes, and flattered herself that
she should exceed her brother in merit if she owned a fault, which she
thought that it would be so much more difficult to confess.  "Yes, but,"
said she, stopping herself, "how can I confess it?  This very evening, in
a few hours, the prize will be decided.  Leonora or I shall win it.  I
have now as good a chance as Leonora, perhaps a better; and must I give
up all my hopes--all that I have been labouring for this month past?  Oh,
I never can!  If it were but to-morrow, or yesterday, or any day but
this, I would not hesitate; but now I am almost certain of the prize, and
if I win it--well, why then I will--I think I will tell all--yes I will;
I am determined," said Cecilia.

Here a bell summoned them to dinner.  Leonora sat opposite to her, and
she was not a little surprised to see Cecilia look so gay and
unconstrained.  "Surely," said she to herself, "if Cecilia had done that
which I suspect, she would not, she could not, look as she does."  But
Leonora little knew the cause of her gaiety.  Cecilia was never in higher
spirits, or better pleased with herself, than when she had resolved upon
a sacrifice or a confession.

"Must not this evening be given to the most amiable?  Whose, then, will
it be?"  All eyes glanced first at Cecilia, and then at Leonora.  Cecilia
smiled; Leonora blushed.  "I see that it is not yet decided," said Mrs.
Villars; and immediately they ran upstairs, amidst confused whisperings.

Cecilia's voice could be distinguished far above the rest.  "How can she
be so happy!" said Leonora to herself.  "Oh Cecilia, there was a time
when you could not have neglected me so! when we were always together the
best of friends and companions; our wishes, tastes, and pleasures the
same!  Surely she did once love me," said Leonora; "but now she is quite
changed.  She has even sold my keepsake; and she would rather win a
bracelet of hair from girls whom she did not always think so much
superior to Leonora, than have my esteem, my confidence, and my
friendship for her whole life--yes, for her whole life, for I am sure she
will be an amiable woman.  Oh, that this bracelet had never been thought
of, or that I were certain of her winning it; for I am sure that I do not
wish to win it from her.  I would rather--a thousand times rather--that
we were as we used to be than have all the glory in the world.  And how
pleasing Cecilia can be when she wishes to please!--how candid she is!--
how much she can improve herself!  Let me be just, though she has
offended me; she is wonderfully improved within this last month.  For one
fault, and THAT against myself, shall I forget all her merits?"

As Leonora said these last words, she could but just hear the voices of
her companions.  They had left her alone in the gallery.  She knocked
softly at Louisa's door.  "Come in," said Louisa; "I'm not asleep.  Oh,"
said she, starting up with the Flora in her hand, the instant that the
door was opened; "I'm so glad you are come, Leonora, for I did so long to
hear what you all were making such a noise about.  Have you forgot that
the bracelet--"

"Oh, yes! is this the evening?" inquired Leonora.

"Well, here's my white shell for you," said Louisa.  "I've kept it in my
pocket this fortnight; and though Cecilia did give me this Flora, I still
love you a great deal better."

"I thank you, Louisa," said Leonora, gratefully.  "I will take your
shell, and I shall value it as long as I live; but here is a red one, and
if you wish to show me that you love me, you will give this to Cecilia.
I know that she is particularly anxious for your preference, and I am
sure that she deserves it."

"Yes, if I could I would choose both of you," said Louisa, "but you know
I can only choose which I like the best."

"If you mean, my dear Louisa," said Leonora, "that you like me the best,
I am very much obliged to you, for, indeed, I wish you to love me; but it
is enough for me to know it in private.  I should not feel the least more
pleasure at hearing it in public, or in having it made known to all my
companions, especially at a time when it would give poor Cecilia a great
deal of pain."

"But why should it give her pain?" asked Louisa; "I don't like her for
being jealous of you."

"Nay, Louisa, surely you don't think Cecilia jealous?  She only tries to
excel, and to please; she is more anxious to succeed than I am, it is
true, because she has a great deal more activity, and perhaps more
ambition.  And it would really mortify her to lose this prize--you know
that she proposed it herself.  It has been her object for this month
past, and I am sure she has taken great pains to obtain it."

"But, dear Leonora, why should you lose it?"

"Indeed, my dear, it would be no loss to me; and, if it were, I would
willingly suffer it for Cecilia; for, though we seem not to be such good
friends as we used to be, I love her very much, and she will love me
again--I'm sure she will; when she no longer fears me as a rival, she
will again love me as a friend."

Here Leonora heard a number of her companions running along the gallery.
They all knocked hastily at the door, calling "Leonora! Leonora! will you
never come?  Cecilia has been with us this half-hour."

Leonora smiled.  "Well, Louisa," said she, smiling, "will you promise
me?"

"Oh, I am sure, by the way they speak to you, that they won't give you
the prize!" said the little Louisa, and the tears started into her eyes.
"They love me, though, for all that," said Leonora; "and as for the
prize, you know whom I wish to have it."

"Leonora! Leonora!" called her impatient companions; "don't you hear us?
What are you about?"

"Oh, she never will take any trouble about anything," said one of the
party; "let's go away."

"Oh, go, go! make haste!" cried Louisa; "don't stay; they are so angry."

"Remember, then, that you have promised me," said Leonora, and she left
the room.

During all this time, Cecilia had been in the garden with her companions.
The ambition which she had felt to win the first prize--the prize of
superior talents and superior application--was not to be compared to the
absolute anxiety which she now expressed to win this simple testimony of
the love and approbation of her equals and rivals.

To employ her exuberant activity, Cecilia had been dragging branches of
lilacs and laburnums, roses and sweet briar, to ornament the bower in
which her fate was to be decided.  It was excessively hot, but her mind
was engaged, and she was indefatigable.  She stood still at last to
admire her works.  Her companions all joined in loud applause.  They were
not a little prejudiced in her favour by the great eagerness which she
expressed to win their prize, and by the great importance which she
seemed to affix to the preference of each individual.  At last, "Where is
Leonora?" cried one of them; and immediately, as we have seen, they ran
to call her.

Cecilia was left alone.  Overcome with heat and too violent exertion, she
had hardly strength to support herself; each moment appeared to her
intolerably long.  She was in a state of the utmost suspense, and all her
courage failed her.  Even hope forsook her; and hope is a cordial which
leaves the mind depressed and enfeebled.

"The time is now come," said Cecilia; "in a few moments all will be
decided.  In a few moments--goodness!  How much do I hazard?  If I should
not win the prize, how shall I confess what I have done?  How shall I beg
Leonora to forgive me?  I, who hoped to restore my friendship to her as
an honour!  They are gone to seek for her.  The moment she appears I
shall be forgotten.  What--what shall I do?" said Cecilia, covering her
face with her hands.

Such was Cecilia's situation when Leonora, accompanied by her companions,
opened the hall door.  They most of them ran forwards to Cecilia.  As
Leonora came into the bower, she held out her hand to Cecilia.  "We are
not rivals, but friends, I hope," said she.  Cecilia clasped her hand;
but she was in too great agitation to speak.

The table was now set in the arbour--the vase was now placed in the
middle.  "Well!" said Cecilia, eagerly, "who begins?"  Caroline, one of
her friends, came forward first, and then all the others successively.
Cecilia's emotion was hardly conceivable.  "Now they are all in!  Count
them, Caroline!"

"One, two, three, four; the numbers are both equal."  There was a dead
silence.  "No, they are not," exclaimed Cecilia, pressing forward, and
putting a shell into a vase.  "I have not given mine, and I give it to
Leonora."  Then, snatching the bracelet, "It is yours, Leonora," said
she; "take it, and give me back your friendship."  The whole assembly
gave one universal clap and a general shout of applause.

"I cannot be surprised at this from you, Cecilia," said Leonora; "and do
you then still love me as you used to do?"

"Oh, Leonora, stop! don't praise me; I don't deserve this," said she,
turning to her loudly applauding companions.  "You will soon despise me.
Oh, Leonora, you will never forgive me!  I have deceived you; I have
sold--"

At this instant, Mrs. Villars appeared.  The crowd divided.  She had
heard all that passed, from her window.  "I applaud your generosity,
Cecilia," said she, "but I am to tell you that, in this instance it is
unsuccessful.  You have not it in your power to give the prize to
Leonora.  It is yours.  I have another vote to give to you.  You have
forgotten Louisa."

"Louisa!" exclaimed Cecilia; "but surely, ma'am, Louisa loves Leonora
better than she does me."

"She commissioned me, however," said Mrs. Villars, "to give you a red
shell; and you will find it in this box."

Cecilia started, and turned as pale as death; it was the fatal box!

Mrs. Villars produced another box.  She opened it; it contained the
Flora.  "And Louisa also desired me," said she, "to return to you this
Flora."  She put it into Cecilia's hand.  Cecilia trembled so that she
could not hold it.  Leonora caught it.

"Oh, madam!  Oh, Leonora!" exclaimed Cecilia; "now I have no hope left.
I intended--I was just going to tell--"

"Dear Cecilia," said Leonora, "you need not tell it me; I know it
already; and I forgive you with all my heart."

"Yes, I can prove to you," said Mrs. Villars, "that Leonora has forgiven
you.  It is she who has given you the prize; it was she who persuaded
Louisa to give you her vote.  I went to see her a little while ago; and
perceiving, by her countenance, that something was the matter, I pressed
her to tell me what it was.

"'Why, madam,' said she, 'Leonora has made me promise to give my shell to
Cecilia.  Now I don't love Cecilia half so well as I do Leonora.
Besides, I would not have Cecilia think I vote for her because she gave
me a Flora.'  Whilst Louisa was speaking," continued Mrs. Villars, "I saw
this silver box lying on the bed.  I took it up, and asked if it was not
yours, and how she came by it.  'Indeed, madam,' said Louisa, 'I could
have been almost certain that it was Cecilia's; but Leonora gave it me,
and she said that she bought it of the peddler this morning.  If anybody
else had told me so, I could not have believed them, because I remember
the box so well; but I can't help believing Leonora.'  But did not you
ask Cecilia about it? said I.  'No, madam,' replied Louisa; 'for Leonora
forbade me.  I guessed her reason.'  Well, said I, give me the box, and I
will carry your shell in it to Cecilia.  'Then, madam,' said she, 'if I
must give it her, pray do take the Flora, and return it to her first,
that she may not think it is for that I do it.'"

"Oh, generous Louisa!" exclaimed Cecilia; "but, indeed, Leonora, I cannot
take your shell."

"Then, dear Cecilia, accept of mine instead of it! you cannot refuse it;
I only follow your example.  As for the bracelet," added Leonora, taking
Cecilia's hand, "I assure you I don't wish for it, and you do, and you
deserve it."

"No," said Cecilia, "indeed, I do not deserve it.  Next to you, surely
Louisa deserves it best."

"Louisa! oh, yes, Louisa," exclaimed everybody with one voice.

"Yes," said Mrs. Villars, "and let Cecilia carry the bracelet to her; she
deserves that reward.  For one fault I cannot forget all your merits,
Cecilia, nor, I am sure, will your companions."

"Then, surely, not your best friend," said Leonora, kissing her.

Everybody present was moved.  They looked up to Leonora with respectful
and affectionate admiration.

"Oh, Leonora, how I love you! and how I wish to be like you!" exclaimed
Cecilia--"to be as good, as generous!"

"Rather wish, Cecilia," interrupted Mrs. Villars, "to be as just; to be
as strictly honourable, and as invariably consistent.  Remember, that
many of our sex are capable of great efforts--of making what they call
great sacrifices to virtue or to friendship; but few treat their friends
with habitual gentleness, or uniformly conduct themselves with prudence
and good sense."



THE LITTLE MERCHANTS.



CHAPTER I.

     Chi di gallina nasce, convien che rozole.
     As the old cock crows, so crows the young.

Those who have visited Italy give us an agreeable picture of the cheerful
industry of the children of all ages in the celebrated city of Naples.
Their manner of living and their numerous employments are exactly
described in the following "Extract from a Traveller's Journal." *

* Varieties of Literature, vol. i. p. 299.

"The children are busied in various ways.  A great number of them bring
fish for sale to town from Santa Lucia; others are very often seen about
the arsenals, or wherever carpenters are at work, employed in gathering
up the chips and pieces of wood; or by the sea-side, picking up sticks,
and whatever else has drifted ashore, which, when their basket is full,
they carry away.

"Children of two or three years old, who can scarcely crawl along upon
the ground, in company with boys of five or six, are employed in this
pretty trade.  Hence they proceed with their baskets into the heart of
the city, where in several places they form a sort of little market,
sitting round with their stock of wood before them.  Labourers, and the
lower order of citizens, buy it of them to burn in the tripods for
warming themselves, or to use in their scanty kitchens.

"Other children carry about for sale the water of the sulphurous wells,
which, particularly in the spring season, is drunk in great abundance.
Others again endeavour to turn a few pence by buying a small matter of
fruit, of pressed honey, cakes, and comfits, and then, like little
peddlers, offer and sell them to other children, always for no more
profit than that they may have their share of them free of expense.

"It is really curious to see how an urchin, whose whole stock and
property consist in a board and a knife, will carry about a water-melon,
or a half roasted gourd, collect a troup of children round him, set down
his board, and proceed to divide the fruit into small pieces among them.

"The buyers keep a sharp look out to see that they have enough for their
little piece of copper; and the Lilliputian tradesmen act with no less
caution as the exigencies of the case may require, to prevent his being
cheated out of a morsel."

The advantages of truth and honesty, and the value of a character for
integrity, are very early felt amongst these little merchants in their
daily intercourse with each other.  The fair dealer is always sooner or
later seen to prosper.  The most cunning cheat is at last detected and
disgraced.

Numerous instances of the truth of this common observation were remarked
by many Neapolitan children, especially by those who were acquainted with
the characters and history of Piedro and Francisco, two boys originally
equal in birth, fortune and capacity, but different in their education,
and consequently in their habits and conduct.  Francisco was the son of
an honest gardener, who, from the time he could speak, taught him to love
to speak the truth, showed him that liars are never believed--that cheats
and thieves cannot be trusted, and that the shortest way to obtain a good
character is to deserve it.

Youth and white paper, as the proverb says, take all impressions.  The
boy profited much by his father's precepts, and more by his example; he
always heard his father speak the truth, and saw that he dealt fairly
with everybody.  In all his childish traffic, Francisco, imitating his
parents, was scrupulously honest, and therefore all his companions
trusted him--"As honest as Francisco," became a sort of proverb amongst
them.

"As honest as Francisco," repeated Piedro's father, when he one day heard
this saying.  "Let them say so; I say, 'As sharp as Piedro'; and let us
see which will go through the world best."  With the idea of making his
son SHARP he made him cunning.  He taught him, that to make a GOOD
BARGAIN was to deceive as to the value and price of whatever he wanted to
dispose of; to get as much money as possible from customers by taking
advantage of their ignorance or of their confidence.  He often repeated
his favourite proverb--"The buyer has need of a hundred eyes; the seller
has need but of one." *  And he took frequent opportunities of explaining
the meaning of this maxim to his son.  He was a fisherman; and as his
gains depended more upon fortune than upon prudence, he trusted
habitually to his good luck.  After being idle for a whole day, he would
cast his line or his nets, and if he was lucky enough to catch a fine
fish, he would go and show it in triumph to his neighbour the gardener.

* Chi compra ha bisogna di cent' occhi; chi vende n'ha assai di uno.

"You are obliged to work all day long for your daily bread," he would
say.  "Look here; I work but five minutes, and I have not only daily
bread, but daily fish."

Upon these occasions, our fisherman always forgot, or neglected to count,
the hours and days which were wasted in waiting for a fair wind to put to
sea, or angling in vain on the shore.

Little Piedro, who used to bask in the sun upon the sea-shore beside his
father, and to lounge or sleep away his time in a fishing-boat, acquired
habits of idleness, which seemed to his father of little consequence
whilst he was BUT A CHILD.

"What will you do with Piedro as he grows up, neighbour?" said the
gardener.  "He is smart and quick enough, but he is always in mischief.
Scarcely a day has passed for this fortnight but I have caught him
amongst my grapes.  I track his footsteps all over my vineyard."

"HE IS BUT A CHILD yet, and knows no better," replied the fisherman.

"But if you don't teach him better now he is a child, how will he know
when he is a man?" said the gardener.

"A mighty noise about a bunch of grapes, truly!" cried the fisherman:  "a
few grapes more or less in your vineyard, what does it signify?"

"I speak for your son's sake, and not for the sake of my grapes," said
the gardener; "and I tell you again, the boy will not do well in the
world, neighbour, if you don't look after him in time."

"He'll do well enough in the world, you will find," answered the
fisherman, carelessly.  "Whenever he casts my nets, they never come up
empty.  'It is better to be lucky than wise.'" *

* E meglio esser fortunato che savio.

This was a proverb which Piedro had frequently heard from his father, and
to which he most willingly trusted, because it gave him less trouble to
fancy himself fortunate than to make himself wise.

"Come here, child," said his father to him, when he returned home after
the preceding conversation with the gardener; "how old are you, my boy?--
twelve years old, is not it?"

"As old as Francisco, and older by six months," said Piedro.

"And smarter and more knowing by six years," said his father.  "Here,
take these fish to Naples, and let us see how you'll sell them for me.
Venture a small fish, as the proverb says, to catch a great one. *  I was
too late with them at the market yesterday, but nobody will know but what
they are just fresh out of the water, unless you go and tell them."

* Butta una sardella per pigliar un luccio.

"Not I; trust me for that; I'm not such a fool," replied Piedro,
laughing; "I leave that to Francisco.  Do you know, I saw him the other
day miss selling a melon for his father by turning the bruised side to
the customer, who was just laying down the money for it, and who was a
raw servant-boy, moreover--one who would never have guessed there were
two sides to a melon, if he had not, as you say, father, been told of
it?"

"Off with you to market.  You are a droll chap," said his father, "and
will sell my fish cleverly, I'll be bound.  As to the rest, let every man
take care of his own grapes.  You understand me, Piedro?"

"Perfectly," said the boy, who perceived that his father was indifferent
as to his honesty, provided he sold fish at the highest price possible.
He proceeded to the market, and he offered his fish with assiduity to
every person whom he thought likely to buy it, especially to those upon
whom he thought he could impose.  He positively asserted to all who
looked at his fish, that they were just fresh out of the water.  Good
judges of men and fish knew that he said what was false, and passed him
by with neglect; but it was at last what he called GOOD LUCK to meet with
the very same young raw servant-boy who would have bought the bruised
melon from Francisco.  He made up to him directly, crying, "Fish!  Fine
fresh fish! fresh fish!"

"Was it caught to-day?" said the boy.

"Yes, this morning; not an hour ago," said Piedro, with the greatest
effrontery.

The servant-boy was imposed upon; and being a foreigner, speaking the
Italian language but imperfectly, and not being expert at reckoning the
Italian money, he was no match for the cunning Piedro, who cheated him
not only as to the freshness, but as to the price of the commodity.
Piedro received nearly half as much again for his fish as he ought to
have done.

On his road homewards from Naples to the little village of Resina, where
his father lived, he overtook Francisco, who was leading his father's
ass.  The ass was laden with large panniers, which were filled with the
stalks and leaves of cauliflowers, cabbages, broccoli, lettuces, etc.--
all the refuse of the Neapolitan kitchens, which are usually collected by
the gardeners' boys, and carried to the gardens round Naples, to be mixed
with other manure.

"Well filled panniers, truly," said Piedro, as he overtook Francisco and
the ass.  The panniers were indeed not only filled to the top, but piled
up with much skill and care, so that the load met over the animal's back.

"It is not a very heavy load for the ass, though it looks so large," said
Francisco.  "The poor fellow, however, shall have a little of this
water," added he, leading the ass to a pool by the roadside.

"I was not thinking of the ass, boy; I was not thinking of any ass, but
of you, when I said, 'Well filled panniers, truly!'  This is your
morning's work, I presume, and you'll make another journey to Naples to-
day, on the same errand, I warrant, before your father thinks you have
done enough?"

"Not before MY FATHER thinks I have done enough, but before I think so
myself," replied Francisco.

"I do enough to satisfy myself and my father, too," said Piedro, "without
slaving myself after your fashion.  Look here," producing the money he
had received for the fish; "all this was had for asking.  It is no bad
thing, you'll allow, to know how to ask for money properly."

"I should be ashamed to beg, or borrow either," said Francisco.

"Neither did I get what you see by begging, or borrowing either," said
Piedro, "but by using my wits; not as you did yesterday, when, like a
novice, you showed the bruised side of your melon, and so spoiled your
market by your wisdom."

"Wisdom I think it still," said Francisco.

"And your father?" asked Piedro.

"And my father," said Francisco.

"Mine is of a different way of thinking," said Piedro.  "He always tells
me that the buyer has need of a hundred eyes, and if one can blind the
whole hundred, so much the better.  You must know, I got off the fish to-
day that my father could not sell yesterday in the market--got it off for
fresh just out of the river--got twice as much as the market price for
it; and from whom, think you?  Why, from the very booby that would have
bought the bruised melon for a sound one if you would have let him.
You'll allow I'm no fool, Francisco, and that I'm in a fair way to grow
rich, if I go on as I have begun."

"Stay," said Francisco; "you forgot that the booby you took in to-day
will not be so easily taken in to-morrow.  He will buy no more fish from
you, because he will be afraid of your cheating him; but he will be ready
enough to buy fruit from me, because he will know I shall not cheat him--
so you'll have lost a customer, and I gained one."

"With all my heart," said Piedro.  "One customer does not make a market;
if he buys no more from me, what care I? there are people enough to buy
fish in Naples."

"And do you mean to serve them all in the same manner?" asked Francisco.

"If they will be only so good as to give me leave," said Piedro,
laughing, and repeating his father's proverb, "'Venture a small fish to
catch a large one.'" *  He had learned to think that to cheat in making
bargains was witty and clever.

* see anted.

"And you have never considered, then," said Francisco, "that all these
people will, one after another, find you out in time?"

"Ay, in time; but it will be some time first.  There are a great many of
them, enough to last me all the summer, if I lose a customer a day," said
Piedro.

"And next summer," observed Francisco, "what will you do?"

"Next summer is not come yet; there is time enough to think what I shall
do before next summer comes.  Why, now, suppose the blockheads, after
they had been taken in and found it out, all joined against me, and would
buy none of our fish--what then?  Are there no trades but that of a
fisherman?  In Naples, are there not a hundred ways of making money for a
smart lad like me? as my father says.  What do you think of turning
merchant, and selling sugar-plums and cakes to the children in their
market?  Would they be hard to deal with, think you?"

"I think not," said Francisco; "but I think the children would find out
in time if they were cheated, and would like it as little as the men."

"I don't doubt them.  Then IN TIME I could, you know, change my trade--
sell chips and sticks in the wood-market--hand about the lemonade to the
fine folks, or twenty other things.  There are trades enough, boy."

"Yes, for the honest dealer," said Francisco, "but for no other; for in
all of them you'll find, as MY father says, that a good character is the
best fortune to set up with.  Change your trade ever so often, you'll be
found out for what you are at last."

"And what am I, pray?" said Piedro, angrily.  "The whole truth of the
matter is, Francisco, that you envy my good luck, and can't bear to hear
this money jingle in my hand.  Ay, stroke the long ears of your ass, and
look as wise as you please.  It's better to be lucky than wise, as MY
father says.  Good morning to you.  When I am found out for what I am, or
when the worst comes to the worst, I can drive a stupid ass, with his
panniers filled with rubbish, as well as you do now, HONEST FRANCISCO."

"Not quite so well.  Unless you were HONEST FRANCISCO, you would not fill
his panniers quite so readily.".

This was certain, that Francisco was so well known for his honesty
amongst all the people at Naples with whom his father was acquainted,
that everyone was glad to deal with him; and as he never wronged anyone,
all were willing to serve him--at least, as much as they could without
loss to themselves:  so that after the market was over, his panniers were
regularly filled by the gardeners and others with whatever he wanted.
His industry was constant, his gains small but certain, and he every day
had more and more reason to trust to his father's maxim--That honesty is
the best policy.

The foreign servant lad, to whom Francisco had so honestly, or, as Piedro
said, so sillily, shown the bruised side of the melon, was an Englishman.
He left his native country, of which he was extremely fond, to attend
upon his master, to whom he was still more attached.  His master was in a
declining state of health, and this young lad waited on him a little more
to his mind than his other servants.  We must, in consideration of his
zeal, fidelity and inexperience, pardon him for not being a good judge of
fish.  Though he had simplicity enough to be easily cheated once, he had
too much sense to be twice made a dupe.  The next time he met Piedro in
the market, he happened to be in company with several English gentlemen's
servants, and he pointed Piedro out to them all as an arrant knave.  They
heard his cry of "Fresh fish! fresh fish! fine fresh fish!" with
incredulous smiles, and let him pass, but not without some expressions of
contempt, though uttered in English, he tolerably well understood; for
the tone of contempt is sufficiently expressive in all languages.  He
lost more by not selling his fish to these people than he had gained the
day before by cheating the ENGLISH BOOBY.  The market was well supplied,
and he could not get rid of his cargo.

"Is not this truly provoking?" said Piedro, as he passed by Francisco,
who was selling fruit for his father.  "Look, my basket is as heavy as
when I left home and look at 'em yourself, they really are fine fresh
fish to-day and yet, because that revengeful booby told how I took him in
yesterday, not one of yonder crowd would buy them; and all the time they
really are fresh to-day!"

"So they are," said Franscisco, "but you said so yesterday, when they
were not; and he that was duped then, is not ready to believe you to-day.
How does he know that you deserve it better?"

"He might have looked at the fish," repeated Piedro; "they are fresh to-
day.  I am sure he need not have been afraid."

