"Ay," said Francisco; "but as my father said to you once--the scalded dog
fears cold water." *

* Il cane scottato dell' acqua calda ha paura poi della fredda.

Here their conversation was interrupted by the same English lad, who
smiled as he came up to Francisco, and taking up a fine pine-apple, he
said, in a mixture of bad Italian and English--"I need not look at the
other side of this; you will tell me if it is not as good as it looks.
Name your price; I know you have but one, and that an honest one; and as
to the rest, I am able and willing to pay for what I buy; that is to say,
my master is, which comes to the same thing.  I wish your fruit could
make him well, and it would be worth its weight in gold to me, at least.
We must have some of your grapes for him."

"Is he not well?" inquired Francisco.  "We must, then, pick out the best
for him," at the same time singling out a tempting bunch.  "I hope he
will like these; but if you could some day come as far as Resina (it is a
village but a few miles out of town, where we have our vineyard), you
could there choose for yourself, and pluck them fresh from the vines for
your poor master."

"Bless you, my good boy; I should take you for an Englishman, by your way
of dealing.  I'll come to your village.  Only write me down the name; for
your Italian names slip through my head.  I'll come to the vineyard if it
was ten miles off; and all the time we stay in Naples (may it not be so
long as I fear it will!), with my master's leave, which he never refuses
me to anything that's proper, I'll deal with you for all our fruit, as
sure as my name's Arthur, and with none else, with my good will.  I wish
all your countrymen would take after you in honesty, indeed I do,"
concluded the Englishman, looking full at Piedro, who took up his unsold
basket of fish, looking somewhat silly, and gloomily walked off.

Arthur, the English servant, was as good as his word.  He dealt
constantly with Francisco, and proved an excellent customer, buying from
him during the whole season as much fruit as his master wanted.  His
master, who was an Englishman of distinction, was invited to take up his
residence, during his stay in Italy, at the Count de F.'s villa, which
was in the environs of Naples--an easy walk from Resina.  Francisco had
the pleasure of seeing his father's vineyard often full of generous
visitors, and Arthur, who had circulated the anecdote of the bruised
melon, was, he said, "proud to think that some of this was his doing, and
that an Englishman never forgot a good turn, be it from a countryman or
foreigner."

"My dear boy," said Francisco's father to him, whilst Arthur was in the
vineyard helping to tend the vines, "I am to thank you and your honesty,
it seems, for our having our hands so full of business this season.  It
is fair you should have a share of our profits."

"So I have, father, enough and enough, when I see you and mother going on
so well.  What can I want more?"

"Oh, my brave boy, we know you are a grateful, good son; but I have been
your age myself; you have companions, you have little expenses of your
own.  Here; this vine, this fig-tree, and a melon a week next summer
shall be yours.  With these make a fine figure amongst the little
Neapolitan merchants; and all I wish is that you may prosper as well, and
by the same honest means, in managing for yourself, as you have done
managing for me."

"Thank you, father; and if I prosper at all, it shall be by those means,
and no other, or I should not be worthy to be called your son."

Piedro the cunning did not make quite so successful a summer's work as
did Francisco the honest.  No extraordinary events happened, no singular
instance of bad or good luck occurred; but he felt, as persons usually
do, the natural consequences of his own actions.  He pursued his scheme
of imposing, as far as he could, upon every person he dealt with; and the
consequence was, that at last nobody would deal with him.

"It is easy to outwit one person, but impossible to outwit all the
world," said a man * who knew the world at least as well as either Piedro
or his father.

* The Duke de Rochefoucault.--"On peut etre puls fin qu'un autre, mais
pas plus fin que tous les autres."

Piedro's father, amongst others, had reason to complain.  He saw his own
customers fall off from him, and was told, whenever he went into the
market, that his son was such a cheat there was no dealing with him.  One
day, when he was returning from the market in a very bad humour, in
consequence of these reproaches, and of his not having found customers
for his goods, he espied his SMART son Piedro at a little merchant's
fruit-board devouring a fine gourd with prodigious greediness.  "Where,
glutton, do you find money to pay for these dainties?" exclaimed his
father, coming close up to him, with angry gestures.  Piedro's mouth was
much too full to make an immediate reply, nor did his father wait for
any, but darting his hand into the youth's pocket, pulled forth a handful
of silver.

"The money, father," said Piedro, "that I got for the fish yesterday, and
that I meant to give you to-day, before you went out."

"Then I'll make you remember it against another time, sirrah!" said his
father.  "I'll teach you to fill your stomach with my money.  Am I to
lose my customers by your tricks, and then find you here eating my all?
You are a rogue, and everybody has found you out to be a rogue; and the
worst of rogues I find you, who scruples not to cheat his own father."

Saying these words, with great vehemence he seized hold of Piedro, and in
the very midst of the little fruit-market gave him a severe beating.
This beating did the boy no good; it was vengeance not punishment.
Piedro saw that his father was in a passion, and knew that he was beaten
because he was found out to be a rogue, rather than for being one.  He
recollected perfectly that his father once said to him:  "Let everyone
take care of his own grapes."

Indeed it was scarcely reasonable to expect that a boy who had been
educated to think that he might cheat every customer he could in the way
of trade, should be afterwards scrupulously honest in his conduct towards
the father whose proverbs encouraged his childhood in cunning.

Piedro writhed with bodily pain as he left the market after his drubbing,
but his mind was not in the least amended.  On the contrary, he was
hardened to the sense of shame by the loss of reputation.  All the little
merchants were spectators of this scene, and heard his father's words:
"You ARE a rogue, and the worst of rogues, who scruples not to cheat his
own father."

These words were long remembered, and long did Piedro feel their effects.
He once flattered himself that, when his trade of selling fish failed
him, he could readily engage in some other; but he now found, to his
mortification, that what Francisco's father said proved true:  "In all
trades the best fortune to set up with is a good character."

Not one of the little Neapolitan merchants would either enter into
partnership with him, give him credit, or even trade with him for ready
money.  "If you would cheat your own father, to be sure you will cheat
us," was continually said to him by these prudent little people.

Piedro was taunted and treated with contempt at home and abroad.  His
father, when he found that his son's smartness was no longer useful in
making bargains, shoved him out of his way whenever he met him.  All the
food or clothes that he had at home seemed to be given to him grudgingly,
and with such expressions as these:  "Take that; but it is too good for
you.  You must eat this, now, instead of gourds and figs--and be thankful
you have even this."

Piedro spent a whole winter very unhappily.  He expected that all his old
tricks, and especially what his father had said of him in the market-
place, would be soon forgotten; but month passed after month, and still
these things were fresh in the memory of all who had known them.

It is not easy to get rid of a bad character.  A very great rogue * was
once heard to say, that he would, with all his heart, give ten thousand
pounds for a good character, because he knew that he could make twenty
thousand by it.

* Chartres.

Something like this was the sentiment of our cunning hero when he
experienced the evils of a bad reputation, and when he saw the numerous
advantages which Francisco's good character procured.  Such had been
Piedro's wretched education, that even the hard lessons of experience
could not alter its pernicious effects.  He was sorry his knavery had
been detected, but he still thought it clever to cheat, and was secretly
persuaded that, if he had cheated successfully, he should have been
happy.  "But I know I am not happy now," said he to himself one morning,
as he sat alone disconsolate by the sea-shore, dressed in tattered
garments, weak and hungry, with an empty basket beside him.  His fishing-
rod, which he held between his knees, bent over the dry sands instead of
into the water, for he was not thinking of what he was about; his arms
were folded, his head hung down, and his ragged hat was slouched over his
face.  He was a melancholy spectacle.

Francisco, as he was coming from his father's vineyard with a large dish
of purple and white grapes upon his head, and a basket of melons and figs
hanging upon his arm, chanced to see Piedro seated in this melancholy
posture.  Touched with compassion, Francisco approached him softly; his
footsteps were not heard upon the sands, and Piedro did not perceive that
anyone was near him till he felt something cold touch his hand; he then
started, and, looking up, saw a bunch of grapes, which Francisco was
holding over his head.

"Eat them:  you'll find them very good, I hope," said Francisco, with a
benevolent smile.

"They are excellent--most excellent, and I am much obliged to you,
Francisco," said Piedro.  "I was very hungry, and that's what I am now,
without anybody's caring anything about it.  I am not the favourite I was
with my father, but I know it is all my own fault."

"Well, but cheer up," said Francisco; "my father always says, 'One who
knows he has been in fault, and acknowledges it, will scarcely be in
fault again.'  Yes, take as many figs as you will," continued he; and
held his basket closer to Piedro, who, as he saw, cast a hungry eye upon
one of the ripe figs.

"But," said Piedro, after he had taken several, "shall not I get you into
a scrape by taking so many?  Won't your father be apt to miss them?"

"Do you think I would give them to you if they were not my own?" said
Francisco, with a sudden glance of indignation.

"Well, don't be angry that I asked the question; it was only from fear of
getting you into disgrace that I asked it."

"It would not be easy for anybody to do that, I hope," said Francisco,
rather proudly.

"And to me less than anybody," replied Piedro, in an insinuating tone,
"_I,_ that am so much obliged to you!"

"A bunch of grapes, and a few figs, are no mighty obligation," said
Francisco, smiling; "I wish I could do more for you.  You seem, indeed,
to have been very unhappy of late.  We never see you in the markets as we
used to do."

"No; ever since my father beat me, and called me rogue before all the
children there, I have never been able to show my face without being
gibed at by one or t'other.  If you would but take me along with you
amongst them, and only just SEEM my friend, for a day or two, or so, it
would quite set me up again; for they all like you."

"I would rather BE than seem your friend, if I could," said Francisco.

"Ay, to be sure; that would be still better," said Piedro, observing that
Francisco, as he uttered his last sentence, was separating the grapes and
other fruits into two equal divisions.  "To be sure I would rather you
would BE than SEEM a friend to me; but I thought that was too much to ask
at first, though I have a notion, notwithstanding I have been so UNLUCKY
lately--I have a notion you would have no reason to repent of it.  You
would find me no bad hand, if you were to try, and take me into
partnership."

"Partnership!" interrupted Francisco, drawing back alarmed; "I had no
thoughts of that."

"But won't you? can't you?" said Piedro, in a supplicating tone; "CAN'T
you have thoughts of it?  You'd find me a very active partner."

Franscisco still drew back, and kept his eyes fixed upon the ground.  He
was embarrassed; for he pitied Piedro, and he scarcely knew how to point
out to him that something more is necessary in a partner in trade besides
activity, and that is honesty.

"Can't you?" repeated Piedro, thinking that he hesitated from merely
mercenary motives.  "You shall have what share of the profits you
please."

"I was not thinking of the profits," said Francisco;  "but without
meaning to be ill-natured to you, Piedro, I must say that I cannot enter
into any partnership with you at present; but I will do what, perhaps,
you will like as well," said he, taking half the fruit out of his basket;
"you are heartily welcome to this; try and sell it in the children's
fruit market.  I'll go on before you, and speak to those I am acquainted
with, and tell them you are going to set up a new character, and that you
hope to make it a good one."

"Hey, shall I!  Thank you for ever, dear Francisco," cried Piedro,
seizing his plentiful gift of fruit.  "Say what you please for me."

"But don't make me say anything that is not true," said Francisco,
pausing.

"No, to be sure not," said Piedro; "I DO mean to give no room for
scandal.  If I could get them to trust me as they do you, I should be
happy indeed."

"That is what you may do, if you please," said Francisco.  "Adieu, I wish
you well with all my heart; but I must leave you now, or I shall be too
late for the market."



CHAPTER II.

     Chi va piano va sano, e anche lontano.
     Fair and softly goes far in a day.

Piedro had now an opportunity of establishing a good character.  When he
went into the market with his grapes and figs, he found that he was not
shunned or taunted as usual.  All seemed disposed to believe in his
intended reformation, and to give him a fair trial.

These favourable dispositions towards him were the consequence of
Francisco's benevolent representations.  He told them that he thought
Piedro had suffered enough to cure him of his tricks, and that it would
be cruelty in them, because he might once have been in fault, to banish
him by their reproaches from amongst them, and thus to prevent him from
the means of gaining his livelihood honestly.

Piedro made a good beginning, and gave what several of the younger
customers thought excellent bargains.  His grapes and figs were quickly
sold, and with the money that he got for them he the next day purchased
from a fruit dealer a fresh supply; and thus he went on for some time,
conducting himself with scrupulous honesty, so that he acquired some
credit among his companions.  They no longer watched him with suspicious
eyes.  They trusted to his measures and weights, and they counted less
carefully the change which they received from him.

The satisfaction he felt from this alteration in their manners was at
first delightful to Piedro; but in proportion to his credit, his
opportunities of defrauding increased; and these became temptations which
he had not the firmness to resist.  His old manner of thinking recurred.

"I make but a few shillings a day, and this is but slow work," said he to
himself.  "What signifies my good character, if I make so little by it?"

Light gains, and frequent, make a heavy purse, * was one of Francisco's
proverbs.  But Piedro was in too great haste to get rich to take time
into his account.  He set his invention to work, and he did not want for
ingenuity, to devise means of cheating without running the risk of
detection.  He observed that the younger part of the community were
extremely fond of certain coloured sugar plums, and of burnt almonds.

* Poco e spesso empie il l'orsetto.

With the money he had earned by two months' trading in fruit he laid in a
large stock of what appeared to these little merchants a stock of almonds
and sugar-plums, and he painted in capital gold coloured letters upon his
board, "Sweetest, largest, most admirable sugar-plums of all colours ever
sold in Naples, to be had here; and in gratitude to his numerous
customers, Piedro adds to these, 'Burnt almonds gratis.'".

This advertisement attracted the attention of all who could read; and
many who could not read heard it repeated with delight.  Crowds of
children surrounded Piedro's board of promise, and they all went away the
first day amply satisfied.  Each had a full measure of coloured sugar-
plums at the usual price, and along with these a burnt almond gratis.
The burnt almond had such an effect upon the public judgment, that it was
universally allowed that the sugar-plums were, as the advertisement set
forth, the largest, sweetest, most admirable ever sold in Naples; though
all the time they were, in no respect, better than any other sugar-plums.

It was generally reported that Piedro gave full measure--fuller than any
other board in the city.  He measured the sugar-plums in a little cubical
tin box; and this, it was affirmed, he heaped up to the top, and pressed
down before he poured out the contents into the open hands of his
approving customers.  This belief, and Piedro's popularity, continued
longer even than he had expected; and, as he thought his sugar-plums had
secured their reputation with the GENEROUS PUBLIC, he gradually neglected
to add burnt almonds gratis.

One day a boy of about ten years old passed carelessly by, whistling as
he went along, and swinging a carpenter's rule in his hand.  "Ha! what
have we here?" cried he, stopping to read what was written on Piedro's
board.  "This promises rarely.  Old as I am, and tall of my age, which
makes the matter worse, I am still as fond of sugar-plums as my little
sister, who is five years younger than I.  Come, Signor, fill me quick,
for I'm in haste to taste them, two measures of the sweetest, largest,
most admirable sugar-plums in Naples--one measure for myself and one for
my little Rosetta."

"You'll pay for yourself and your sister, then," said Piedro, "for no
credit is given here."

"No credit do I ask," replied the lively boy; "when I told you I loved
sugar-plums, did I tell you I loved them, or even my sister, so well as
to run in debt for them?  Here's for myself, and here's for my sister's
share," said he, laying down his money; "and now for the burnt almonds
gratis, my good fellow."

"They are all out; I have been out of burnt almonds this great while,"
said Piedro.

"Then why are they in your advertisement here?" said Carlo.

"I have not had time to scratch them out of the board."

"What! not when you have, by your own account, been out of them a great
while?  I did not know it required so much time to blot out a few words--
let us try."; and as he spoke, Carlo, for that was the name of Piedro's
new customer, pulled a bit of white chalk out of his pocket, and drew a
broad score across the line on the board which promised burnt almonds
gratis.

"You are most impatient," said Piedro; "I shall have a fresh stock of
almonds to-morrow."

"Why must the board tell a lie to-day?"

"It would ruin me to alter it," said Piedro.

"A lie may ruin you, but I could scarcely think the truth could."

"You have no right to meddle with me or my board," said Piedro, put off
his guard, and out of his usual soft voice of civility, by this last
observation.  "My character, and that of my board, are too firmly
established now for any chance customer like you to injure."

"I never dreamed of injuring you or anyone else," said Carlo--"I wish,
moreover, you may not injure yourself.  Do as you please with your board,
but give me my sugar-plums, for I have some right to meddle with those,
having paid for them."

"Hold out your hand, then."

"No, put them in here, if you please; put my sister's, at least, in here;
she likes to have them in this box:  I bought some for her in it
yesterday, and she'll think they'll taste the better out of the same box.
But how is this? your measure does not fill my box nearly; you give us
very few sugar-plums for our money."

"I give you full measure, as I give to everybody."

"The measure should be an inch cube, I know," said Carlo; "that's what
all the little merchants have agreed to, you know."

"True," said Piedro, "so it is."

"And so it is, I must allow," said Carlo, measuring the outside of it
with the carpenter's rule which he held in his hand.  "An inch every way;
and yet by my eye--and I have no bad one, being used to measuring
carpenter's work for my father--by my eye I should think this would have
held more sugar-plums."

"The eye often deceives us;" said Piedro.  "There's nothing like
measuring, you find."

"There's nothing like measuring, I find, indeed," replied Carlo, as he
looked closely at the end of his rule, which, since he spoke last, he had
put into the cube to take its depth in the inside.  "This is not as deep
by a quarter of an inch, Signor Piedro, measured within as it is measured
without."

Piedro changed colour terribly, and seizing hold of the tin box,
endeavoured to wrest it from the youth who measured so accurately.  Carlo
held his prize fast, and lifting it above his head, he ran into the midst
of the square where the little market was held, exclaiming, "A discovery!
a discovery! that concerns all who love sugar-plums.  A discovery! a
discovery that concerns all who have ever bought the sweetest, and most
admirable sugar-plums ever sold in Naples."

The crowd gathered from all parts of the square as he spoke.

"We have bought," and "We have bought of those sugar-plums," cried
several little voices at once, "if you mean Piedro's."

"The same," continued Carlo--"he who, out of gratitude to his numerous
customers, gives, or promises to give, burnt almonds gratis."

"Excellent they were!" cried several voices.  "We all know Piedro well;
but what's your discovery?"

"My discovery is," said Carlo, "that you, none of you, know Piedro.  Look
you here; look at this box--this is his measure; it has a false bottom--
it holds only three-quarters as much as it ought to do; and his numerous
customers have all been cheated of one-quarter of every measure of the
admirable sugar-plums they have bought from him.  'Think twice of a good
bargain,' says the proverb."

"So we have been finely duped, indeed," cried some of the bystanders,
looking at one another with a mortified air.  "Full of courtesy, full of
craft!" *  "So this is the meaning of his burnt almonds gratis," cried
others; all joined in an uproar of indignation, except one, who, as he
stood behind the rest, expressed in his countenance silent surprise and
sorrow.

* Chi et FA pi caress che non vole,
O ingannato t'ha, o inganuar et vole.

"Is this Piedro a relation of yours?" said Carlo, going up to this silent
person.  "I am sorry, if he be, that I have published his disgrace, for I
would not hurt YOU.  You don't sell sugar-plums as he does, I'm sure; for
my little sister Rosetta has often bought from you.  Can this Piedro be a
friend of yours?"

"I wished to have been his friend; but I see I can't," said Francisco.
"He is a neighbour of ours, and I pitied him; but since he is at his old
tricks again, there's an end of the matter.  I have reason to be obliged
to you, for I was nearly taken in.  He has behaved so well for some time
past, that I intended this very evening to have gone to him, and to have
told him that I was willing to do for him what he has long begged of me
to do--to enter into partnership with him."

"Francisco! Francisco!--your measure, lend us your measure!" exclaimed a
number of little merchants crowding round him.  "You have a measure for
sugar-plums; and we have all agreed to refer to that, and to see how much
we have been cheated before we go to break Piedro's bench and declare him
bankrupt, *--the punishment for all knaves."

* This word comes from two Italian words, bunco rotto--broken bench.
Bankers and merchants used formerly to count their money, and write their
bills of exchange upon benches in the streets; and when a merchant or
banker lost his credit, and was unable to pay his debts, his bench was
broken.

They pressed on to Francisco's board, obtained his measure, found that it
held something more than a quarter above the quantity that could be
contained in Piedro's.  The cries of the enraged populace were now most
clamorous.  They hung the just and the unjust measures upon high poles;
and, forming themselves into a formidable phalanx, they proceeded towards
Piedro's well known yellow lettered board, exclaiming, as they went
along, "Common cause! common cause!  The little Neapolitan merchants will
have no knaves amongst them!  Break his bench! break his bench!  He is a
bankrupt in honesty."

Piedro saw the mob, heard the indignant clamour, and, terrified at the
approach of numbers, he fled with the utmost precipitation, having
scarcely time to pack up half his sugar-plums.  There was a prodigious
number, more than would have filled many honest measures, scattered upon
the ground and trampled under foot by the crowd.  Piedro's bench was
broken, and the public vengeance wreaked itself also upon his treacherous
painted board.  It was, after being much disfigured by various
inscriptions expressive of the universal contempt for Piedro, hung up in
a conspicuous part of the market-place; and the false measure was
fastened like a cap upon one of its corners.  Piedro could never more
show his face in this market, and all hopes of friendship--all hopes of
partnership with Francisco--were for ever at an end.

If rogues would calculate, they would cease to be rogues; for they would
certainly discover that it is most for their interest to be honest--
setting aside the pleasure of being esteemed and beloved, of having a
safe conscience, with perfect freedom from all the various embarrassments
and terror to which knaves are subject.  Is it not clear that our crafty
hero would have gained rather more by a partnership with Francisco, and
by a fair character, than he could possibly obtain by fraudulent dealing
in comfits?

When the mob had dispersed, after satisfying themselves with executing
summary justice upon Piedro's bench and board, Francisco found a
carpenter's rule lying upon the ground near Piedro's broken bench, which
he recollected to have seen in the hands of Carlo.  He examined it
carefully, and he found Carlo's name written upon it, and the name of the
street where he lived; and though it was considerably out of his way, he
set out immediately to restore the rule, which was a very handsome one,
to its rightful owner.  After a hot walk through several streets, he
overtook Carlo, who had just reached the door of his own house.  Carlo
was particularly obliged to him, he said, for restoring this rule to him,
as it was a present from the master of a vessel, who employed his father
to do carpenter's work for him.  "One should not praise one's self, they
say," continued Carlo, "but I long so much to gain your good opinion,
that I must tell you the whole history of the rule you have restored.  It
was given to me for having measured the work and made up the bill of a
whole pleasure-boat myself.  You may guess I should have been sorry
enough to have lost it.  Thank you for its being once more in my careless
hands, and tell me, I beg, whenever I can do you any service.  By-the-by,
I can make up for you a fruit stall.  I'll do it to-morrow, and it shall
be the admiration of the market.  Is there anything else you could think
of for me?"

"Why, yes," said Francisco; "since you are so good-natured, perhaps you'd
be kind enough to tell me the meaning of some of those lines and figures
that I see upon your rule.  I have a great curiosity to know their use."

"That I'll explain to you with pleasure, as far as I know them myself;
but when I'm at fault, my father, who is cleverer than I am, and
understands trigonometry, can help us out."

"Trigonometry!" repeated Francisco, not a little alarmed at the high
sounding word; "that's what I certainly shall never understand."

"Oh, never fear," replied Carlo, laughing.  "I looked just as you do now-
-I felt just as you do now--all in a fright and a puzzle, when I first
heard of angles and sines, and cosines, and arcs and centres, and
complements and tangents."

"Oh mercy! mercy!" interrupted Francisco, whilst Carlo laughed, with a
benevolent sense of superiority.

"Why," said Carlo, "you'll find all these things are nothing when you are
used to them.  But I cannot explain my rule to you here broiling in the
sun.  Besides, it will not be the work of a day, I promise you; but come
and see us at your leisure hours, and we'll study it together.  I have a
great notion we shall become friends; and, to begin, step in with me
now," said Carlo, "and eat a little macaroni with us.  I know it is ready
by this time.  Besides, you'll see my father, and he'll show you plenty
of rules and compasses, as you like such things; and then I'll go home
with you in the cool of the evening, and you shall show me your melons
and vines, and teach me, in time, something of gardening.  Oh, I see we
must be good friends, just made for each other; so come in--no ceremony."

Carlo was not mistaken in his predictions; he and Francisco became very
good friends, spent all their leisure hours together, either in Carlo's
workshop or in Francisco's vineyard, and they mutually improved each
other.  Francisco, before he saw his friend's rule, knew but just enough
of arithmetic to calculate in his head the price of the fruit which he
sold in the market; but with Carlo's assistance, and the ambition to
understand the tables and figures upon the wonderful rule, he set to work
in earnest, and in due time, satisfied both himself and his master.

"Who knows but these things that I am learning now may be of some use to
me before I die?" said Francisco, as he was sitting one morning with his
tutor, the carpenter.

"To be sure it will," said the carpenter, putting down his compasses,
with which he was drawing a circle--"Arithmetic is a most useful, and I
was going to say necessary thing to be known by men in all stations; and
a little trigonometry does no harm.  In short, my maxim is, that no
knowledge comes amiss; for a man's head is of as much use to him as his
hands; and even more so.

     "A word to the wise will always suffice."

"Besides, to say nothing of making a fortune, is not there a great
pleasure in being something of a scholar, and being able to pass one's
time with one's book, and one's compasses and pencil?  Safe companions
these for young and old.  No one gets into mischief that has pleasant
things to think of and to do when alone; and I know, for my part, that
trigonometry is--"

Here the carpenter, just as he was going to pronounce a fresh panegyric
upon his favourite trigonometry, was interrupted by the sudden entrance
of his little daughter Rosetta, all in tears:  a very unusual spectacle,
for, taking the year round, she shed fewer tears than any child of her
age in Naples.

"Why, my dear good humoured little Rosetta, what has happened?  Why these
large tears?" said her brother Carlo, and he went up to her, and wiped
them from her cheeks.  "And these that are going over the bridge of the
nose so fast?  I must stop these tears, too," said Carlo.

Rosetta, at this speech, burst out laughing, and said that she did not
know till then that she had any bridge on her nose.

"And were these shells the cause of the tears?" said her brother, looking
at a heap of shells, which she held before her in her frock.

"Yes, partly," said Rosetta.  "It was partly my own fault, but not all.
You know I went out to the carpenter's yard, near the arsenal, where all
the children are picking up chips and sticks so busily; and I was as busy
as any of them, because I wanted to fill my basket soon; and then I
thought I should sell my basketful directly in the little wood-market.
As soon as I had filled my basket, and made up my faggot (which was not
done, brother, till I was almost baked by the sun, for I was forced to
wait by the carpenters for the bits of wood to make up my faggot)--I say,
when it was all ready, and my basket full, I left it altogether in the
yard."

"That was not wise to leave it," said Carlo.

"But I only left it for a few minutes, brother, and I could not think
anybody would be so dishonest as to take it whilst I was away.  I only
just ran to tell a boy, who had picked up all these beautiful shells upon
the sea-shore, and who wanted to sell them, that I should be glad to buy
them from him, if he would only be so good as to keep them for me, for an
hour or so, till I had carried my wood to market, and till I had sold it,
and so had money to pay him for the shells."

"Your heart was set mightily on these shells, Rosetta."

"Yes; for I thought you and Francisco, brother, would like to have them
for your nice grotto that you are making at Resina.  That was the reason
I was in such a hurry to get them.  The boy who had them to sell was very
good-natured; he poured them into my lap, and said I had such an honest
face he would trust me, and that as he was in a great hurry, he could not
wait an hour whilst I sold my wood; but that he was sure I would pay him
in the evening, and he told me that he would call here this evening for
the money.  But now what shall I do, Carlo?  I shall have no money to
give him:  I must give back his shells, and that's a great pity."

"But how happened it that you did not sell your wood?"

"Oh, I forgot; did not I tell you that?  When I went for my basket, do
you know it was empty, quite empty, not a chip left?  Some dishonest
person had carried it all off.  Had not I reason to cry now, Carlo?'

"I'll go this minute into the wood-market, and see if I can find your
faggot.  Won't that be better than crying?" said her brother.  "Should
you know any one of your pieces of wood again if you were to see them?"

"Yes, one of them, I am sure, I should know again," said Rosetta.  "It
had a notch at one end of it, where one of the carpenters cut it off from
another piece of wood for me."

"And is this piece of wood from which the carpenter cut it still to be
seen?" said Francisco.

"Yes, it is in the yard; but I cannot bring it to you, for it is very
heavy."

"We can go to it," said Francisco, "and I hope we shall recover your
basketful."

Carlo and his friend went with Rosetta immediately to the yard, near the
arsenal, saw the notched piece of wood, and then proceeded to the little
wood-market, and searched every heap that lay before the little factors;
but no notched bit was to be found, and Rosetta declared that she did not
see one stick that looked at all like any of hers.

On their part, her companions eagerly untied their faggots to show them
to her, and exclaimed, "That they were incapable of taking what did not
belong to them; that of all persons they should never have thought of
taking anything from the good natured little Rosetta, who was always
ready to give to others, and to help them in making up their loads."

Despairing of discovering the thief, Francisco and Carlo left the market.
As they were returning home, they were met by the English servant Arthur,
who asked Francisco where he had been, and where he was going.

As soon as he heard of Rosetta's lost faggot, and of the bit of wood,
notched at one end, of which Rosetta drew the shape with a piece of
chalk, which her brother had lent her, Arthur exclaimed, "I have seen
such a bit of wood as this within this quarter of an hour; but I cannot
recollect where.  Stay! this was at the baker's, I think, where I went
for some rolls for my master.  It was lying beside his oven."

To the baker's they all went as fast as possible, and they got there but
just in time.  The baker had in his hand the bit of wood with which he
was that instant going to feed his oven.

"Stop, good Mr. Baker!" cried Rosetta, who ran into the baker's shop
first; and as he heard "Stop! stop!" re-echoed by many voices, the baker
stopped; and turning to Francisco, Carlo and Arthur, begged, with a
countenance of some surprise, to know why they had desired him to stop.

The case was easily explained, and the baker told them that he did not
buy any wood in the little market that morning; that this faggot he had
purchased between the hours of twelve and one from a lad about
Francisco's height, whom he met near the yard of the arsenal.

"This is my bit of wood, I am sure; I know it by this notch," said
Rosetta.

"Well," said the baker, "if you will stay here a few minutes, you will
probably see the lad who sold it to me.  He desired to be paid in bread,
and my bread was not quite baked when he was here.  I bid him call again
in an hour, and I fancy he will be pretty punctual, for he looked
desperately hungry."

The baker had scarcely finished speaking when Francisco, who was standing
watching at the door, exclaimed, "Here comes Piedro!  I hope he is not
the boy who sold you the wood, Mr. Baker?"

"He is the boy, though," replied the baker, and Piedro, who now entered
the shop, started at the sight of Carlo and Francisco, whom he had never
seen since the day of disgrace in the fruit-market.

"Your servant, Signor Piedro," said Carlo; "I have the honour to tell you
that this piece of wood, and all that you took out of the basket, which
you found in the yard of the arsenal, belongs to my sister."

"Yes, indeed," cried Rosetta.

Piedro being very certain that nobody saw him when he emptied Rosetta's
basket, and imagining that he was suspected only upon the bare assertion
of a child like Rosetta, who might be baffled and frightened out of her
story, boldly denied the charge, and defied any one to prove him guilty.

"He has a right to be heard in his own defence," said Arthur, with the
cool justice of an Englishman; and he stopped the angry Carlo's arm, who
was going up to the culprit with all the Italian vehemence of oratory and
gesture.  Arthur went on to say something in bad Italian about the
excellence of an English trial by jury, which Carlo was too much enraged
to hear, but to which Francisco paid attention, and turning to Piedro, he
asked him if he was willing to be judged by twelve of his equals?

"With all my heart," said Piedro, still maintaining an unmoved
countenance, and they returned immediately to the little wood-market.  On
their way, they had passed through the fruit-market, and crowds of those
who were well acquainted with Piedro's former transactions followed, to
hear the event of the present trial.

Arthur could not, especially as he spoke wretched Italian, make the eager
little merchants understand the nature and advantages of an English trial
by jury.  They preferred their own summary mode of proceeding.
Francisco, in whose integrity they all had perfect confidence, was chosen
with unanimous shouts for the judge; but he declined the office, and
another was appointed.  He was raised upon a bench, and the guilty but
insolent looking Piedro, and the ingenuous, modest Rosetta stood before
him.  She made her complaint in a very artless manner; and Piedro, with
ingenuity, which in a better cause would have deserved admiration, spoke
volubly and craftily in his own defence.  But all that he could say could
not alter facts.  The judge compared the notched bit of wood found at the
baker's with a piece from which it was cut, which he went to see in the
yard of the arsenal.  It was found to fit exactly.  The judge then found
it impossible to restrain the loud indignation of all the spectators.
The prisoner was sentenced never more to sell wood in the market; and the
moment sentence was pronounced, Piedro was hissed and hooted out of the
market-place.  Thus a third time he deprived himself of the means of
earning his bread.

We shall not dwell upon all his petty methods of cheating in the trades
he next attempted.  He handed lemonade about in a part of Naples where he
was not known, but he lost his customers by putting too much water and
too little lemon into this beverage.  He then took to the waters from the
sulphurous springs, and served them about to foreigners; but one day, as
he was trying to jostle a competitor from the coach door, he slipped his
foot, and broke his glasses.  They had been borrowed from an old woman,
who hired out glasses to the boys who sold lemonade.  Piedro knew that it
was the custom to pay, of course, for all that was broken; but this he
was not inclined to do.  He had a few shillings in his pocket, and
thought that it would be very clever to defraud this poor woman of her
right, and to spend his shillings upon what he valued much more than he
did his good name--macaroni.  The shillings were soon gone.

We shall now for the present leave Piedro to his follies and his fate;
or, to speak more properly, to his follies and their inevitable
consequences.

Francisco was all this time acquiring knowledge from his new friends,
without neglecting his own or his father's business.  He contrived,
during the course of autumn and winter, to make himself a tolerable
arithmetician.  Carlo's father could draw plans in architecture neatly;
and pleased with the eagerness Francisco showed to receive instruction,
he willingly put a pencil and compasses into his hand, and taught him all
he knew himself.  Francisco had great perseverance, and, by repeated
trials, he at length succeeded in copying exactly all the plans which his
master lent him.  His copies, in time, surpassed the originals, and Carlo
exclaimed, with astonishment:  "Why, Francisco, what an astonishing
GENIUS you have for drawing!--Absolutely you draw plans better than my
father!"

"As to genius," said Francisco, honestly, "I have none.  All that I have
done has been done by hard labour.  I don't know how other people do
things; but I am sure that I never have been able to get anything done
well but by patience.  Don't you remember, Carlo, how you and even
Rosetta laughed at me the first time your father put a pencil into my
awkward, clumsy hands?"

"Because," said Carlo, laughing again at the recollection, "you held your
pencil so drolly; and when you were to cut it, you cut it just as if you
were using a pruning-knife to your vines; but now it is your turn to
laugh, for you surpass us all.  And the times are changed since I set
about to explain this rule of mine to you."

"Ay, that rule," said Francisco--"how much I owe to it!  Some great
people, when they lose any of their fine things, cause the crier to
promise a reward of so much money to anyone who shall find and restore
their trinket.  How richly have you and your father rewarded me for
returning this rule!"

Francisco's modesty and gratitude, as they were perfectly sincere,
attached his friends to him most powerfully; but there was one person who
regretted our hero's frequent absences from his vineyard at Resina.  Not
Francisco's father, for he was well satisfied his son never neglected his
business; and as to the hours spent in Naples, he had so much confidence
in Francisco that he felt no apprehensions of his getting into bad
company.  When his son had once said to him, "I spend my time at such a
place, and in such and such a manner," he was as well convinced of its
being so as if he had watched and seen him every moment of the day.  But
it was Arthur who complained of Francisco's absence.

"I see, because I am an Englishman," said he, "you don't value my
friendship, and yet that is the very reason you ought to value it; no
friends so good as the English, be it spoken without offence to your
Italian friend, for whom you now continually leave me to dodge up and
down here in Resina, without a soul that I like to speak to, for you are
the only Italian I ever liked."

"You shall like another, I promise you," said Francisco.  "You must come
with me to Carlo's, and see how I spend my evenings; then complain of me,
if you can."

It was the utmost stretch of Arthur's complaisance to pay this visit;
but, in spite of his national prejudices and habitual reserve of temper,
he was pleased with the reception he met with from the generous Carlo and
the playful Rosetta.  They showed him Francisco's drawings with
enthusiastic eagerness; and Arthur, though no great judge of drawing, was
in astonishment, and frequently repeated, "I know a gentleman who visits
my master who would like these things.  I wish I might have them to show
him."

"Take them, then," said Carlo; "I wish all Naples could see them,
provided they might be liked half as well as I like them."

Arthur carried off the drawings, and one day, when his master was better
than usual, and when he was at leisure, eating a dessert of Francisco's
grapes, he entered respectfully, with his little portfolio under his arm,
and begged permission to show his master a few drawings done by the
gardener's son, whose grapes he was eating.

Though not quite so partial a judge as the enthusiastic Carlo, this
gentleman was both pleased and surprised at the sight of these drawings,
considering how short a time Francisco had applied himself to this art,
and what slight instructions he had received.  Arthur was desired to
summon the young artist.  Francisco's honest, open manner, joined to the
proofs he had given of his abilities, and the character Arthur gave him
for strict honesty, and constant kindness to his parents, interested Mr.
Lee, the name of this English gentleman, much in his favour.  Mr. Lee was
at this time in treaty with an Italian painter, whom he wished to engage
to copy for him exactly some of the cornices, mouldings, tablets, and
antique ornaments which are to be seen amongst the ruins of the ancient
city of Herculaneum. *

* We must give those of our young English readers who may not be
acquainted with the ancient city of Herculaneum, some idea of it.  None
can be ignorant that near Naples is the celebrated volcanic mountain of
Vesuvius;--that, from time to time, there happen violent eruptions from
this mountain; that is to say, flames and immense clouds of smoke issue
from different openings, mouths, or CRATERS, as they are called, but more
especially from the summit of the mountain, which is distinguished by the
name of THE crater.  A rumbling, and afterwards a roaring noise is heard
within, and prodigious quantities of stones and minerals burnt into
masses (scoriae), are thrown out of the crater, sometimes to a great
distance.  The hot ashes from Mount Vesuvius have often been seen upon
the roofs of the houses of Naples, from which it is six miles distant.
Streams of lava run down the sides of the mountains during the time of an
eruption, destroying everything in their way, and overwhelm the houses
and vineyards which are in the neighbourhood.

About 17OO years ago, during the reign of the Roman Emperor Titus, there
happened a terrible eruption of Mount Vesuvius; and a large city called
Herculaneum, which was situated at about four miles' distance from the
volcano, was overwhelmed by the streams of lava which poured into it,
filled up the streets, and quickly covered over the tops of the houses,
so that the whole was no more visible.  It remained for many years
buried.  The lava which covered it became in time fit for vegetation,
plants grew there, a new soil was formed, and a new town called Portici
was built over this place where Herculaneum formerly stood.  The little
village of Resina is also situated near the spot.  About fifty years ago,
in a poor man's garden at Resina, a hole in a well about thirty feet
below the surface of the earth was observed.  Some persons had the
curiosity to enter into this hole, and, after creeping underground for
some time, they came to the foundations of houses.  The peasants,
inhabitants of the village, who had probably never heard of Herculaneum,
were somewhat surprised at their discovery.**  About the same time, in a
pit in the town of Portici, a similar passage underground was discovered,
and, by orders of the King of Naples, workmen were employed to dig away
the earth, and clear the passage.  They found, at length, the entrance
into the town, which, during the reign of Titus, was buried under lava.
It was about eighty-eight Neapolitan palms (a palm contains near nine
inches) below the top of the pit.  The workmen, as they cleared the
passages, marked their way with chalk when they came to any turning, lest
they should lose themselves.  The streets branched out in many
directions, and, lying across them, the workmen often found large pieces
of timber, beams, and rafters; some broken in the fall, others entire.
These beams and rafters are burned quite black like charcoal, except
those that were found in moist places, which have more the colour of
rotten wood, and which are like a soft paste, into which you might run
your hand.  The walls of the houses slant, some one way, some another,
and some are upright.  Several magnificent buildings of brick, faced with
marble of different colours, are partly seen, where the workmen have
cleared away the earth and lava with which they were encrusted.  Columns
of red and white marble, and flights of steps, are seen in different
places; and out of the ruins of the palaces some very fine statues and
pictures have been dug.  Foreigners who visit Naples are very curious to
see this subterraneous city, and are desirous to carry with them into
their own country some proofs of their having examined this wonderful
place.

** Philosophical Transactions, vol. ix. p. 440.



CHAPTER III.

     Tutte le gran faciende si fanno di poca cosa.
     What great events from trivial causes spring.

Signor Camillo, the artist employed by Mr. Lee to copy some of the
antique ornaments in Herculaneum, was a liberal minded man, perfectly
free from that mean jealousy which would repress the efforts of rising
genius.

"Here is a lad scarcely fifteen, a poor gardener's son, who, with merely
the instructions he could obtain from a common carpenter, has learned to
draw these plans and elevations, which you see are tolerably neat.  What
an advantage your instruction would be to him," said Mr. Lee, as he
introduced Francisco to Signor Camillo.  "I am interested in this lad
from what I have learned of his good conduct.  I hear he is strictly
honest, and one of the best of sons.  Let us do something for him.  If
you will give him some knowledge of your art, I will, as far as money can
recompense you for your loss of time, pay whatever you may think
reasonable for his instruction."

Signor Camillo made no difficulties; he was pleased with his pupil's
appearance, and every day he liked him better and better.  In the room
where they worked together there were some large books of drawings and
plates, which Francisco saw now and then opened by his master, and which
he had a great desire to look over; but when he was left in the room by
himself he never touched them, because he had not permission.  Signor
Camillo, the first day he came into this room with his pupil, said to
him, "Here are many valuable books and drawings, young man.  I trust,
from the character I have heard of you, that they will be perfectly safe
here."

Some weeks after Francisco had been with the painter, they had occasion
to look for the front of a temple in one of these large books.  "What!
don't you know in which book to look for it, Francisco?" cried his
master, with some impatience.  "Is it possible that you have been here so
long with these books, and that you cannot find the print I mean?  Had
you half the taste I gave you credit for, you would have singled it out
from all the rest, and have it fixed in your memory."

"But, signor, I never saw it," said Francisco, respectfully, "or,
perhaps, I should have preferred it."

"That you never saw it, young man, is the very thing of which I complain.
Is a taste for the arts to be learned, think you, by looking at the cover
of a book like this?  Is it possible that you never thought of opening
it?"

"Often and often," cried Francisco, "have I longed to open it; but I
thought it was forbidden me, and however great my curiosity in your
absence, I have never touched them.  I hoped indeed, that the time would
come when you would have the goodness to show them to me."

"And so the time is come, excellent young man," cried Camillo; "much as I
love taste, I love integrity more.  I am now sure of your having the one,
and let me see whether you have, as I believe you have, the other.  Sit
you down here beside me; and we will look over these books together."

The attention with which his young pupil examined everything, and the
pleasure he unaffectedly expressed in seeing these excellent prints,
sufficiently convinced his judicious master that it was not from the want
of curiosity or taste that he had never opened these tempting volumes.
His confidence in Francisco was much increased by this circumstance,
slight as it may appear.

One day, Signor Camillo came behind Francisco, as he was drawing with
much intentness, and tapping him upon the shoulder, he said to him:  "Put
up your pencils and follow me, I can depend upon your integrity; I have
pledged myself for it.  Bring your note-book with you, and follow me; I
will this day show you something that will entertain you at least as much
as my large book of prints.  Follow me."

Francisco followed, till they came to the pit near the entrance of
