Herculaneum.  "I have obtained leave for you to accompany me," said his
master, "and you know, I suppose, that this is not a permission granted
to everyone?"  Paintings of great value, besides ornaments of gold and
silver, antique bracelets, rings, etc., are from time to time found
amongst these ruins, and therefore it is necessary that no person should
be admitted whose honesty cannot be depended upon.  Thus, even
Francisco's talents could not have advanced him in the world, unless they
had been united to integrity.  He was much delighted and astonished by
the new scene that was now opened to his view; and as, day after day, he
accompanied his master to this subterraneous city, he had leisure for
observation.  He was employed, as soon as he had gratified his curiosity,
in drawing.  There are niches in the walls in several places, from which
pictures have been dug, and these niches are often adorned with elegant
masques, figures and animals, which have been left by the ignorant or
careless workmen, and which are going fast to destruction.  Signor
Camillo, who was copying these for his English employer, had a mind to
try his pupil's skill, and, pointing to a niche bordered with grotesque
figures, he desired him to try if he could make any hand of it.
Francisco made several trials, and at last finished such an excellent
copy, that his enthusiastic and generous master, with warm encomiums,
carried it immediately to his patron, and he had the pleasure to receive
from Mr. Lee a purse containing five guineas, as a reward and
encouragement for his pupil.

Francisco had no sooner received this money, than he hurried to his
father and mother's cottage.  His mother, some months before this time,
had taken a small dairy farm; and her son had once heard her express a
wish that she was but rich enough to purchase a remarkably fine brindled
cow, which belonged to a farmer in the neighbourhood.

"Here, my dear mother," cried Francisco, pouring the guineas into her
lap; "and here," continued he, emptying a bag which contained about as
much more, in small Italian coins, the profits of trade-money he had
fairly earned during the two years he sold fruit amongst the little
Neapolitan merchants; "this is all yours, dearest mother, and I hope it
will be enough to pay for the brindled cow.  Nay, you must not refuse me-
-I have set my heart upon the cow being milked by you this very evening;
and I'll produce my best bunches of grapes, and my father, perhaps, will
give us a melon; for I've had no time for melons this season; and I'll
step to Naples and invite--may I, mother?--my good friends, dear Carlo
and your favourite little Rosetta, and my old drawing master, and my
friend Arthur, and we'll sup with you at your dairy."

The happy mother thanked her son, and the father assured him that neither
melon nor pine-apple should be spared, to make a supper worthy of his
friends.

The brindled cow was bought, and Arthur and Carlo and Rosetta most
joyfully accepted their invitation.

The carpenter had unluckily appointed to settle a long account that day
with one of his employers, and he could not accompany his children.  It
was a delicious evening; they left Naples just as the sea-breeze, after
the heats of the day, was most refreshingly felt.  The walk to Resina,
the vineyard, the dairy, and most of all, the brindled cow, were praised
by Carlo and Rosetta, with all the Italian superlatives which signify,
"Most beautiful! most delightful! most charming!"  Whilst the English
Arthur, with as warm a heart, was more temperate in his praise, declaring
that this was "the most like an English summer's evening of any he had
ever felt since he came to Italy:  and that, moreover, the cream was
almost as good as what he had been used to drink in Cheshire."  The
company, who were all pleased with each other, and with the gardener's
good fruit, which he produced in great abundance, did not think of
separating till late.

It was a bright moonlight night, and Carlo asked his friend if he would
walk with them part of the way to Naples.  "Yes, all the way most
willingly," cried Francisco, "that I may have the pleasure of giving to
your father, with my own hands, this fine bunch of grapes, that I have
reserved for him out of my own share."

"Add this fine pine-apple for my share, then," said his father, "and a
pleasant walk to you, my young friends."

They proceeded gaily along, and when they reached Naples, as they passed
through the square where the little merchants held their market,
Francisco pointed to the spot where he found Carlo's rule.  He never
missed an opportunity of showing his friends that he did not forget their
former kindness to him.  "That rule," said he, "has been the cause of all
my present happiness, and I thank you for--"

"Oh, never mind thanking him now," interrupted Rosetta, "but look yonder,
and tell me what all those people are about."  She pointed to a group of
men, women and children, who were assembled under a piazza, listening in
various attitudes of attention to a man, who was standing upon a flight
of steps speaking in a loud voice, and with much action, to the people
who surrounded him.  Francisco, Carlo and Rosetta joined his audience.
The moon shone full upon his countenance, which was very expressive and
which varied frequently according to the characters of the persons whose
history he was telling, according to all the changes of their fortune.
This man was one of those who are called Improvisatori--persons who, in
Italian towns, go about reciting verses or telling stories, which they
are supposed to invent as they go on speaking. Some of these people speak
with great fluency, and collect crowds round them in the public streets.
When an Improvisatore sees the attention of his audience fixed, and when
he comes to some very interesting part of his narrative, he dexterously
drops his hat upon the ground, and pauses till his auditors have paid
tribute to his eloquence.  When he thinks the hat sufficiently full, he
takes it up again, and proceeds with his story.  The hat was dropped just
as Francisco and his two friends came under the piazza.  The orator had
finished one story, and was going to commence another.  He fixed his eyes
upon Francisco, then glanced at Carlo and Rosetta, and after a moment's
consideration he began a story which bore some resemblance to one that
our young English readers may, perhaps, know by the name of "Cornaro, or
the Grateful Turk."

Francisco was deeply interested in this narrative, and when the hat was
dropped, he eagerly threw in his contribution.  At the end of the story,
when the speaker's voice stopped, there was a momentary silence, which
was broken by the orator himself, who exclaimed, as he took up the hat
which lay at his feet, "My friends, here is some mistake! this is not my
hat; it has been changed whilst I was taken up with my story.  Pray,
gentlemen, find my hat amongst you; it was a remarkably good one, a
present from a nobleman for an epigram I made.  I would not lose my hat
for twice its value.  It has my name written withinside of it, Dominicho,
Improvisatore.  Pray, gentlemen, examine your hats."

Everybody present examined their hats, and showed them to Dominicho, but
his was not amongst them.  No one had left the company; the piazza was
cleared, and searched in vain.  "The hat has vanished by magic," said
Dominicho.

"Yes, and by the same magic a statue moves," cried Carlo, pointing to a
figure standing in a niche, which had hitherto escaped observation.  The
face was so much in the shade, that Carlo did not at first perceive that
the statue was Piedro.  Piedro, when he saw himself discovered, burst
into a loud laugh, and throwing down Dominicho's hat, which he held in
his hand behind him, cried, "A pretty set of novices!  Most excellent
players at hide-and-seek you would make."

Whether Piedro really meant to have carried off the poor man's hat, or
whether he was, as he said, merely in jest, we leave it to those who know
his general character to decide.

Carlo shook his head.  "Still at your old tricks, Piedro," said he.
"Remember the old proverb:  No fox so cunning but he comes to the
furrier's at last." *

* Tutte le volpi si trovano in pellicera.

"I defy the furrier and you, too," replied Piedro, taking up his own
ragged hat.  "I have no need to steal hats; I can afford to buy better
than you'll have upon your head.  Francisco, a word with you, if you have
done crying at the pitiful story you have been listening to so
attentively."

"And what would you say to me?" said Francisco, following him a few
steps.  "Do not detain me long, because my friends will wait for me."

"If they are friends, they can wait," said Piedro.  "You need not be
ashamed of being seen in my company now, I can tell you; for I am, as I
always told you I should be, the richest man of the two."

"Rich! you rich?" cried Francisco.  "Well, then, it was impossible you
could mean to trick that poor man out of his good hat."

"Impossible!" said Piedro.  Francisco did not consider that those who
have habits of pilfering continue to practise them often, when the
poverty which first tempted them to dishonesty ceases.  "Impossible!  You
stare when I tell you I am rich; but the thing is so.  Moreover, I am
well with my father at home.  I have friends in Naples, and I call myself
Piedro the Lucky.  Look you here," said he, producing an old gold coin.
"This does not smell of fish, does it?  My father is no longer a
fisherman, nor I either.  Neither do I sell sugar-plums to children:  nor
do I slave myself in a vineyard, like some folks; but fortune, when I
least expected it, has stood my friend.  I have many pieces of gold like
this.  Digging in my father's garden, it was my luck to come to an old
Roman vessel full of gold.  I have this day agreed for a house in Naples
for my father.  We shall live, whilst we can afford it, like great folks,
you will see; and I shall enjoy the envy that will be felt by some of my
old friends, the little Neapolitan merchants, who will change their note
when they see my change of fortune.  What say you to all this, Francisco
the Honest?"

"That I wish you joy of your prosperity, and hope you may enjoy it long
and well."

"Well, no doubt of that.  Everyone who has it enjoys it WELL.  He always
dances well to whom fortune pipes." *

* Assai ben balla a chi fortuna suona.

"Yes, no longer pipe, no longer dance," replied Francisco; and here they
parted; for Piedro walked away abruptly, much mortified to perceive that
his prosperity did not excite much envy, or command any additional
respect from Francisco.

"I would rather," said Francisco, when he returned to Carlo and Rosetta,
who waited for him under the portico, where he left them--"I would rather
have such good friends as you, Carlo and Arthur, and some more I could
name, and, besides that, have a clear conscience, and work honestly for
my bread, than be as lucky as Piedro.  Do you know he has found a
treasure, he says, in his father's garden--a vase full of gold?  He
showed me one of the gold pieces."

"Much good may they do him.  I hope he came honestly by them," said
Carlo; "but ever since the affair of the double measure, I suspect
double-dealing always from him.  It is not our affair, however.  Let him
make himself happy his way, and we ours.

     "He that would live in peace and rest,
      Must hear, and see, and say the best." *

* Odi, vedi, taci, se vuoi viver in pace.

All Piedro's neighbours did not follow this peaceable maxim; for when he
and his father began to circulate the story of the treasure found in the
garden, the village of Resina did not give them implicit faith.  People
nodded and whispered, and shrugged their shoulders; then crossed
themselves, and declared that they would not, for all the riches of
Naples, change places with either Piedro or his father.  Regardless, or
pretending to be regardless, of these suspicions, Piedro and his father
persisted in their assertions.  The fishing-nets were sold, and
everything in their cottage was disposed of; they left Resina, went to
live at Naples, and, after a few weeks, the matter began to be almost
forgotten in the village.

The old gardener, Francisco's father, was one of those who endeavoured to
THINK THE BEST; and all that he said upon the subject was, that he would
not exchange Francisco the Honest for Piedro the Lucky; that one can't
judge of the day till one sees the evening as well as the morning. *

* La vita il fine,--e di loda la sera.
"Compute the morn and evening of their day."--Pope.

Not to leave our readers longer in suspense, we must inform them that the
peasants of Resina were right in their suspicions.  Piedro had never
found any treasure in his father's garden, but he came by his gold in the
following manner:--

After he was banished from the little wood-market for stealing Rosetta's
basketful of wood, after he had cheated the poor woman, who let glasses
out to hire, out of the value of the glasses which he broke, and, in
short, after he had entirely lost his credit with all who knew him, he
roamed about the streets of Naples, reckless of what became of him.

He found the truth of the proverb, "that credit lost is like a Venice
glass broken--it can't be mended again."  The few shillings which he had
in his pocket supplied him with food for a few days.  At last he was glad
to be employed by one of the peasants who came to Naples to load their
asses with manure out of the streets.  They often follow very early in
the morning, or during the night-time, the trace of carriages that are
gone, or that are returning from the opera; and Piedro was one night at
this work, when the horses of a nobleman's carriage took fright at the
sudden blaze of some fireworks.  The carriage was overturned near him; a
lady was taken out of it, and was hurried by her attendants into a shop,
where she stayed till her carriage was set to rights.  She was too much
alarmed for the first ten minutes after her accident to think of
anything; but after some time, she perceived that she had lost a valuable
diamond cross, which she had worn that night at the opera.  She was
uncertain where she had dropped it; the shop, the carriage, the street,
were searched for it in vain.

Piedro saw it fall as the lady was lifted out of the carriage, seized
upon it, and carried it off.  Ignorant as he was of the full value of
what he had stolen, he knew not how to satisfy himself as to this point,
without trusting someone with the secret.

After some hesitation, he determined to apply to a Jew, who, as it was
whispered, was ready to buy everything that was offered to him for sale,
without making any TROUBLESOME inquiries.  It was late; he waited till
the streets were cleared, and then knocked softly at the back door of the
Jew's house.  The person who opened the door for Piedro was his own
father.  Piedro started back; but his father had fast hold of him.

"What brings you here?" said the father, in a low voice, a voice which
expressed fear and rage mixed.

"Only to ask my way--my shortest way," stammered Piedro.

"No equivocations!  Tell me what brings you here at this time of the
night?  I WILL know."

Piedro, who felt himself in his father's grasp, and who knew that his
father would certainly search him, to find out what he had brought to
sell, thought it most prudent to produce the diamond cross.  His father
could but just see its lustre by the light of a dim lamp, which hung over
their heads in the gloomy passage in which they stood.

"You would have been duped, if you had gone to sell this to the Jew.  It
is well it has fallen into my hands.  How came you by it?"  Piedro
answered that he had found it in the street.  "Go your ways home, then,"
said his father; "it is safe with me.  Concern yourself no more about
it."

Piedro was not inclined thus to relinquish his booty, and he now thought
proper to vary in his account of the manner in which he found the cross.
He now confessed that it had dropped from the dress of a lady, whose
carriage was overturned as she was coming home from the opera, and he
concluded by saying that, if his father took his prize from him without
giving him his share of the profits, he would go directly to the shop
where the lady stopped whilst her servants were raising the carriage, and
that he would give notice of his having found the cross.

Piedro's father saw that his SMART son, though scarcely sixteen years of
age, was a match for him in villainy.  He promised him that he should
have half of whatever the Jew would give for the diamonds, and Piedro
insisted upon being present at the transaction.

We do not wish to lay open to our young readers scenes of iniquity.  It
is sufficient to say that the Jew, who was a man old in all the arts of
villainy, contrived to cheat both his associates, and obtained the
diamond cross for less than half its value.  The matter was managed so
that the transaction remained undiscovered.  The lady who lost the cross,
after making fruitless inquiries, gave up the search, and Piedro and his
father rejoiced in the success of their manoeuvres.

It is said, that "Ill gotten wealth is quickly spent"; * and so it proved
in this instance.  Both father and son lived a riotous life as long as
their money lasted, and it did not last many months.  What his bad
education began, bad company finished, and Piedro's mind was completely
ruined by the associates with whom he became connected during what he
called his PROSPERITY.  When his money was at an end, these unprincipled
friends began to look cold upon him, and at last plainly told him--"If
you mean to LIVE WITH US, you must LIVE AS WE DO."  They lived by
robbery.

* Vien presto consumato l'ingiustamente acquistato.

Piedro, though familiarized to the idea of fraud, was shocked at the
thought of becoming a robber by profession.  How difficult it is to stop
in the career of vice!  Whether Piedro had power to stop, or whether he
was hurried on by his associates, we shall, for the present, leave in
doubt.



CHAPTER IV

We turn with pleasure from Piedro the Cunning to Francisco the Honest.
Francisco continued the happy and useful course of his life.  By his
unremitting perseverance, he improved himself rapidly under the
instructions of his master and friend, Signor Camillo; his friend, we
say, for the fair and open character of Francisco won, or rather earned,
the friendship of this benevolent artist.  The English gentleman seemed
to take a pride in our hero's success and good conduct.  He was not one
of those patrons who think that they have done enough when they have
given five guineas.  His servant Arthur always considered every generous
action of his master's as his own, and was particularly pleased whenever
this generosity was directed towards Francisco.

As for Carlo and the little Rosetta, they were the companions of all the
pleasant walks which Francisco used to take in the cool of the evening,
after he had been shut up all day at his work.  And the old carpenter,
delighted with the gratitude of his pupil, frequently repeated--"that he
was proud to have given the first instructions to such a GENIUS; and that
he had always prophesied Francisco would be a GREAT man."

"And a good man, papa," said Rosetta; "for though he has grown so great,
and though he goes into palaces now, to say nothing of that place
underground, where he has leave to go, yet, notwithstanding all this, he
never forgets my brother Carlo and you."

"That's the way to have good friends," said the carpenter.  "And I like
his way; he does more than he says.  Facts are masculine, and words are
feminine." *

* I fatti sono maschii, le parole femmine.

These goods friends seemed to make Francisco happier than Piedro could be
made by his stolen diamonds.

One morning, Francisco was sent to finish a sketch of the front of an
ancient temple, amongst the ruins of Herculaneum.  He had just reached
the pit, and the men were about to let him down with cords, in the usual
manner, when his attention was caught by the shrill sound of a scolding
woman's voice.  He looked, and saw at some paces distant this female
fury, who stood guarding the windlass of a well, to which, with
threatening gestures and most voluble menaces, she forbade all access.
The peasants--men, women and children, who had come with their pitchers
to draw water at this well--were held at bay by the enraged female.  Not
one dared to be the first to advance; whilst she grasped with one hand
the handle of the windlass, and, with the other tanned muscular arm
extended, governed the populace, bidding them remember that she was
padrona, or mistress of the well.  They retired, in hopes of finding a
more gentle padrona at some other well in the neighbourhood; and the
fury, when they were out of sight, divided the long black hair which hung
over her face, and, turning to one of the spectators, appealed to them in
a sober voice, and asked if she was not right in what she had done?  "I,
that am padrona of the well," said she, addressing herself to Francisco,
who, with great attention, was contemplating her with the eye of a
painter--"I, that am padrona of the well, must in times of scarcity do
strict justice, and preserve for ourselves alone the water of our well.
There is scarcely enough even for ourselves.  I have been obliged to make
my husband lengthen the ropes every day for this week past.  If things go
on at this rate, there will soon be not one drop of water left in my
well."

"Nor in any of the wells of the neighbourhood," added one of the workmen,
who was standing by; and he mentioned several in which the water had
lately suddenly decreased; and a miller affirmed that his mill had
stopped for want of water.

Francisco was struck by these remarks.  They brought to his recollection
similar facts, which he had often heard his father mention in his
childhood, as having been observed previous to the last eruption of Mount
Vesuvius. *  He had also heard from his father, in his childhood, that it
is better to trust to prudence than to fortune; and therefore, though the
peasants and workmen, to whom he mentioned his fears, laughed, and said,
"That as the burning mountain had been favourable to them for so many
years, they would trust to it and St.  Januarius one day longer," yet
Francisco immediately gave up all thoughts of spending this day amidst
the ruins of Herculaneum.  After having inquired sufficiently, after
having seen several wells, in which the water had evidently decreased,
and after having seen the mill-wheels that were standing still for want
of their usual supply, he hastened home to his father and mother,
reported what he had heard and seen, and begged of them to remove, and to
take what things of value they could to some distance from the dangerous
spot where they now resided.

* Phil. Trans. vol. ix.

Some of the inhabitants of Resina, whom he questioned, declared that they
had heard strange rumbling noises underground; and a peasant and his son,
who had been at work the preceding day in a vineyard, a little above the
village, related that they had seen a sudden puff of smoke come out of
the earth, close to them; and that they had, at the same time, heard a
noise like the going off of a pistol. *

* These facts are mentioned in Sir William Hamilton's account of an
eruption of Mount Vesuvius.--See Phil. Trans. 1795, first part.

The villagers listened with large eyes and open ears to these relations;
yet such was their habitual attachment to the spot they lived upon, or
such the security in their own good fortune, that few of them would
believe that there could be any necessity for removing.--"We'll see what
will happen to-morrow; we shall be safe here one day longer," said they.

Francisco's father and mother, more prudent than the generality of their
neighbours, went to the house of a relation, at some miles' distance from
Vesuvius, and carried with them all their effects.

In the meantime, Francisco went to the villa where his English friends
resided.  The villa was in a most dangerous situation, near Terre del
Greco--a town that stands at the foot of Mount Vesuvius.  He related all
the facts that he had heard to Arthur, who, not having been, like the
inhabitants of Resina, familiarized to the idea of living in the vicinity
of a burning mountain, and habituated to trust in St. Januarius, was
sufficiently alarmed by Francisco's representations.  He ran to his
master's apartment, and communicated all that he had just heard.  The
Count de Flora and his lady, who were at this time in the house,
ridiculed the fears of Arthur, and could not be prevailed upon to remove
even as far as Naples.  The lady was intent upon preparations for her
birthday, which was to be celebrated in a few days with great
magnificence at their villa; and she observed that it would be a pity to
return to town before that day, and they had everything arranged for the
festival.  The prudent Englishman had not the gallantry to appear to be
convinced by these arguments, and he left the place of danger.  He left
it not too soon, for the next morning exhibited a scene--a scene which we
shall not attempt to describe.

We refer our young readers to the account of this dreadful eruption of
Mount Vesuvius, published by Sir W. Hamilton in the "Philosophical
Transactions."  It is sufficient here to say that, in the space of about
five hours, the wretched inhabitants of Torre del Greco saw their town
utterly destroyed by the streams of burning lava which poured from the
mountain.  The villa of Count de Flora, with some others, which were at a
little distance from the town, escaped; but they were absolutely
surrounded by the lava.  The count and countess were obliged to fly from
their house with the utmost precipitation in the night-time; and they had
not time to remove any of their furniture, their plate, clothes, or
jewels.

A few days after the eruption, the surface of the lava became so cool
that people could walk upon it, though several feet beneath the surface
it was still exceedingly hot.  Numbers of those who had been forced from
their houses now returned to the ruins to try to save whatever they
could.  But these unfortunate persons frequently found their houses had
been pillaged by robbers, who, in these moments of general confusion,
enrich themselves with the spoils of their fellow-creatures.

"Has the count abandoned his villa? and is there no one to take care of
his plate and furniture?  The house will certainly be ransacked before
morning," said the old carpenter to Francisco, who was at his house
giving him an account of their flight.  Francisco immediately went to the
count's house in warn him of his danger.  The first person he saw was
Arthur, who, with a face of terror, said to him, "Do you know what has
happened?  It is all over with Resina!"

"All over with Resina!  What, has there been a fresh eruption?  Has the
lava reached Resina?"

"No; but it will inevitably be blown up.  There," said Arthur, pointing
to a thin figure of an Italian, who stood pale and trembling, and looking
up to heaven as he crossed himself repeatedly.  "There," said Arthur, "is
a man who has left a parcel of his cursed rockets and fireworks, with I
don't know how much gunpowder, in the count's house, from which we have
just fled.  The wind blows that way.  One spark of fire, and the whole is
blown up."

Francisco waited not to hear more; but instantly, without explaining his
intentions to anyone, set out for the count's villa, and, with a bucket
of water in his hand, crossed the beds of lava with which the house was
encompassed; when, reaching the hall where the rockets and gunpowder were
left, he plunged them into the water, and returned with them in safety
over the lava, yet warm under his feet.

What was the surprise and joy of the poor firework-maker when he saw
Francisco return from this dangerous expedition!  He could scarcely
believe his eyes, when he saw the rockets and the gunpowder all safe.

The count, who had given up the hopes of saving his palace, was in
admiration when he heard of this instance of intrepidity, which properly
saved not only his villa, but the whole village of Resina, from
destruction.  These fireworks had been prepared for the celebration of
the countess' birthday, and were forgotten in the hurry of the night on
which the inhabitants fled from Torre del Greco.

"Brave young man!" said the count to Francisco, "I thank you, and shall
not limit my gratitude to thanks.  You tell me that there is danger of my
villa being pillaged by robbers.  It is from this moment your interest,
as well as mine, to prevent their depredations; for (trust to my
liberality) a portion of all that is saved of mine shall be yours."

"Bravo! bravissimo!" exclaimed one, who started from a recessed window in
the hall where all this passed.  "Bravo! bravissimo!"--Francisco thought
he knew the voice and the countenance of this man, who exclaimed with so
much enthusiasm.  He remembered to have seen him before, but when, or
where, he could not recollect.  As soon as the count left the hall, the
stranger came up to Francisco.  "Is it possible," said he, "that you
don't know me?  It is scarcely a twelvemonth since I drew tears from your
eyes."

"Tears from my eyes?" repeated Francisco, smiling; "I have shed but few
tears.  I have had but few misfortunes in my life."  The stranger
answered him by two extempore Italian lines, which conveyed nearly the
same idea that has been so well expressed by an English poet:--

     "To each their sufferings--all are men
         Condemn'd alike to groan;
      The feeling for another's woes,
         Th' unfeeling for his own."

"I know you now perfectly well," cried Francisco; "you are the
Improvisatore who, one fine moonlight night last summer, told us the
story of Cornaro the Turk."

"The same," said the Improvisatore; "the same, though in a better dress,
which I should not have thought would have made so much difference in
your eyes, though it makes all the difference between man and man in the
eyes of the stupid vulgar.  My genius has broken through the clouds of
misfortune of late.  A few happy impromptu verses I made on the Count de
Flora's fall from his horse attracted attention.  The count patronizes
me.  I am here now to learn the fate of an ode I have just composed for
his lady's birthday.  My ode was to have been set to music, and to have
been performed at his villa near Torre del Greco, if these troubles had
not intervened.  Now that the mountain is quiet again, people will return
to their senses.  I expect to be munificently rewarded.  But, perhaps, I
detain you.  Go; I shall not forget to celebrate the heroic action you
have performed this day.  I still amuse myself amongst the populace in my
tattered garb late in the evenings, and I shall sound your praises
through Naples in a poem I mean to recite on the late eruption of Mount
Vesuvius.  Adieu."

The Improvisatore was as good as his word.  That evening, with more than
his usual enthusiasm, he recited his verses to a great crowd of people in
one of the public squares.  Amongst the crowd were several to whom the
name of Francisco was well known, and by whom he was well beloved.  These
were his young companions, who remembered him as a fruit-seller amongst
the little merchants.  They rejoiced to hear his praises, and repeated
the lines with shouts of applause.

"Let us pass.  What is all this disturbance in the streets?" said a man,
pushing his way through the crowd.  A lad who held by his arm stopped
suddenly on hearing the name of Francisco, which the people were
repeating with so much enthusiasm.

"Ha!  I have found at last a story that interests you more than that of
Cornaro the Turk," cried the Improvisatore, looking in the face of the
youth, who had stopped so suddenly.  "You are the young man who, last
summer, had liked to have tricked me out of my new hat.  Promise me you
won't touch it now," said he, throwing down the hat at his feet, "or you
hear not one word I have to say.  Not one word of the heroic action
performed at the villa of the Count de Flora, near Torre del Greco, this
morning, by Signor Francisco."

"SIGNOR Francisco!" repeated the lad with disdain.  "Well, let us hear
what you have to tell of him," added he.  "Your hat is very safe, I
promise you; I shall not touch it.  What of SIGNOR Francisco?"

"SIGNOR Francisco I may, without impropriety, call him," said the
Improvisatore, "for he is likely to become rich enough to command the
title from those who might not otherwise respect his merit."

"Likely to become rich! how?" said the lad, whom our readers have
probably before this time discovered to be Piedro.  "How, pray, is he
likely to become rich enough to be a signor?"

"The Count de Flora has promised him a liberal portion of all the fine
furniture, plate and jewels that can be saved from his villa at Torre del
Greco.  Francisco is gone down hither now with some of the count's
domestics to protect the valuable goods against those villainous
plunderers, who robbed their fellow-creatures of what even the flames of
Vesuvius would spare."

"Come, we have had enough of this stuff," cried the man whose arm Piedro
held.  "Come away," and he hurried forwards.

This man was one of the villains against whom the honest orator expressed
such indignation.  He was one of those with whom Piedro got acquainted
during the time that he was living extravagantly upon the money he gained
by the sale of the stolen diamond cross.  That robbery was not
discovered; and his success, as he called it, hardened him in guilt.  He
was both unwilling and unable to withdraw himself from the bad company
with whom his ill gotten wealth connected him.  He did not consider that
bad company leads to the gallows. *

* La mala compagnia e quella che mena uomini a la forca.

The universal confusion which followed the eruption of Mount Vesuvius was
to these villains a time of rejoicing.  No sooner did Piedro's companion
hear of the rich furniture, plate, etc., which the imprudent orator had
described as belonging to the Count de Flora's villa, than he longed to
make himself master of the whole.

"It is a pity," said Piedro, "that the count has sent Francisco, with his
servants down to guard it."

"And who is this Francisco of whom you seem to stand in so much awe?"

"A boy, a young lad only, of about my own age; but I know him to be
sturdily honest.  The servants we might corrupt; but even the old proverb
of 'Angle with a silver hook,' * won't hold good with him."

* Pescar col hamo d'argento.

"And if he cannot be won by fair means, he must be conquered by foul,"
said the desperate villain; "but if we offer him rather more than the
count has already promised for his share of the booty, of course he will
consult at once his safety and his interest."

"No," said Piedro; "that is not his nature.  I know him from a child, and
we had better think of some other house for to-night's business."

"None other; none but this," cried his companion, with an oath.  "My mind
is determined upon this, and you must obey your leader:  recollect the
fate of him who failed me yesterday."

The person to whom he alluded was one of the gang of robbers who had been
assassinated by his companions for hesitating to commit some crime
suggested by their leader.  No tyranny is so dreadful as that which is
exercised by villains over their young accomplices, who become their
slaves.  Piedro, who was of a cowardly nature, trembled at the
threatening countenance of his captain, and promised submission.

In the course of the morning, inquiries were made secretly amongst the
count's servants; and the two men who were engaged to sit up at the villa
that night along with Francisco, were bribed to second the views of this
gang of thieves.  It was agreed that about midnight the robbers should be
let into the house; that Francisco should be tied hand and foot, whilst
they carried off their booty.  "He is a stubborn chap, though so young, I
understand," said the captain of the robbers to his men; "but we carry
poniards, and know how to use them.  Piedro, you look pale.  You don't
require to be reminded of what I said to you when we were alone just
now?"

Piedro's voice failed, and some of his comrades observed that he was
young and new to the business.  The captain, who, from being his
pretended friend during his wealthy days, had of late become his tyrant,
cast a stern look at Piedro, and bid him be sure to be at the old Jew's,
which was the place of meeting, in the dusk of the evening.  After saying
this he departed.

Piedro, when he was alone, tried to collect his thoughts--all his
thoughts were full of horror.  "Where am I?" said he to himself; "what am
I about?  Did I understand rightly what he said about poniards?
Francisco; oh, Francisco!  Excellent, kind, generous Francisco!  Yes, I
recollect your look when you held the bunch of grapes to my lips, as I
sat by the sea-shore deserted by all the world; and now, what friends
have I.  Robbers and--"  The word MURDERERS he could not utter.  He again
recollected what had been said about poniards, and the longer his mind
fixed upon the words, and the look that accompanied them, the more he was
shocked.  He could not doubt but that it was the serious intention of his
accomplices to murder Francisco, if he should make any resistance.

Piedro had at this moment no friend in the world to whom he could apply
for advice or assistance.  His wretched father died some weeks before
this time, in a fit of intoxication.  Piedro walked up and down the
street, scarcely capable of thinking, much less of coming to any rational
resolution.

The hours passed away, the shadows of the houses lengthened under his
footsteps, the evening came on, and when it grew dusk, after hesitating
in great agony of mind for some time, his fear of the robbers' vengeance
prevailed over every other feeling, and he went at the appointed hour to
the place of meeting.

The place of meeting was at the house of that Jew to whom he, several
months before, sold the diamond cross.  That cross which he thought
himself so lucky to have stolen, and to have disposed of undetected, was,
in fact, the cause of his being in his present dreadful situation.  It
was at the Jew's that he connected himself with this gang of robbers, to
whom he was now become an absolute slave.

"Oh, that I dared to disobey!" said he to himself, with a deep sigh, as
he knocked softly at the back door of the Jew's house.  The back door
opened into a narrow, unfrequented street, and some small rooms at this
side of the house were set apart for the reception of guests who desired
to have their business kept secret.  These rooms were separated by a dark
passage from the rest of the house, and numbers of people came to the
shop in the front of the house, which looked into a creditable street,
without knowing anything more, from the ostensible appearance of the
shop, than that it was a kind of pawnbroker's, where old clothes, old
iron, and all sorts of refuse goods, might be disposed of conveniently.

At the moment Piedro knocked at the back door, the front shop was full of
customers; and the Jew's boy, whose office it was to attend to these
signals, let Piedro in, told him that none of his comrades were yet come,
and left him in a room by himself.

He was pale and trembling, and felt a cold dew spread over him.  He had a
leaden image of Saint Januarius tied round his neck, which, in the midst
of his wickedness, he superstitiously preserved as a sort of charm, and
on this he kept his eyes stupidly fixed, as he sat alone in this gloomy
place.

He listened from time to time, but he heard no noise at the side of the
house where he was.  His accomplices did not arrive, and, in a sort of
impatient terror, the attendant upon an evil conscience, he flung open
the door of his cell, and groped his way through the passage which he
knew led to the public shop.  He longed to hear some noise, and to mix
with the living.  The Jew, when Piedro entered the shop, was bargaining
with a poor, thin-looking man about some gunpowder.

"I don't deny that it has been wet," said the man, "but since it was in
the bucket of water, it has been carefully dried.  I tell you the simple
truth, that so soon after the grand eruption of Mount Vesuvius, the
people of Naples will not relish fireworks.  My poor little rockets, and
even my Catherine-wheels, will have no effect.  I am glad to part with
all I have in this line of business.  A few days ago I had fine things in
readiness for the Countess de Flora's birthday, which was to have been
celebrated at the count's villa."

"Why do you fix your eyes on me, friend?  What is your discourse to me?"
said Piedro, who imagined that the man fixed his eyes upon him as he
mentioned the name of the count's villa.

"I did not know that I fixed my eyes upon you; I was thinking of my
fireworks," said the poor man, simply.  "But now that I do look at you
and hear your voice, I recollect having had the pleasure of seeing you
before."

"When? where?" said Piedro.

"A great while ago; no wonder you have forgotten me," said the man; "but
I can recall the night to your recollection.  You were in the street with
me the night I let off that unlucky rocket, which frightened the horses,
and was the cause of overturning a lady's coach.  Don't you remember the
circumstance?"

"I have a confused recollection of some such thing," said Piedro, in
great embarrassment; and he looked suspiciously at this man, in doubt
whether he was cunning, and wanted to sound him, or whether he was so
simple as he appeared.

"You did not, perhaps, hear, then," continued the man, "that there was a
great search made, after the overturn, for a fine diamond cross,
belonging to the lady in the carriage?  That lady, though I did not know
it till lately, was the Countess de Flora."

"I know nothing of the matter," interrupted Piedro, in great agitation.
His confusion was so marked, that the firework-maker could not avoid
taking notice of it; and a silence of some moments ensued.  The Jew, more
practised in dissimulation than Piedro, endeavoured to turn the man's
attention back to his rockets and his gunpowder--agreed to take the
gunpowder--paid for it in haste, and was, though apparently unconcerned,
eager to get rid of him.  But this was not so easily done.  The man's
curiosity was excited, and his suspicions of Piedro were increased every
moment by all the dark changes of his countenance.  Piedro, overpowered
with the sense of guilt, surprised at the unexpected mention of the
diamond cross, and of the Count de Flora's villa, stood like one
convicted, and seemed fixed to the spot, without power of motion.

"I want to look at the old cambric that you said you had--that would do
for making--that you could let me have cheap for artificial flowers,"
said the firework-maker to the Jew; and as he spoke, his eye from time to
time looked towards Piedro.

Piedro felt for the leaden image of the saint, which he wore round his
neck.  The string which held it cracked, and broke with the pull he gave
it.  This slight circumstance affected his terrified and superstitious
mind more than all the rest.  He imagined that at this moment his fate
was decided; that Saint Januarius deserted him, and that he was undone.
He precipitately followed the firework-man the instant he left the shop,
and seizing hold of his arm, whispered, "I must speak to you."

"Speak, then," said the man, astonished.

"Not here; this way," said he, drawing him towards the dark passage:
"what I have to say must not be overheard.  You are going to the Count de
Flora's, are not you?"

"I am," said the man.  He was going there to speak to the countess about
some artificial flowers; but Piedro thought he was going to speak to her
about the diamond cross.

"You are going to give information against me?  Nay, hear me, I confess
that I purloined that diamond cross; but I can do the count a great
service, upon condition that he pardons me.  His villa is to be attacked
this night by four well armed men.  They will set out five hours hence.
I am compelled, under the threat of assassination, to accompany them; but
I shall do no more.  I throw myself upon the count's mercy.  Hasten to
him--we have no time to lose."

The poor man, who heard this confession, escaped from Piedro the moment
he loosed his arm.  With all possible expedition he ran to the count's
palace in Naples, and related to him all that had been said by Piedro.
Some of the count's servants, on whom he could most depend, were at a
distant part of the city attending their mistress, but the English
gentleman offered the services of his man Arthur.  Arthur no sooner heard
the business, and understood that Francisco was in danger, than he armed
himself without saying one word, saddled his English horse, and was ready
to depart before anyone else had finished their exclamations and
conjectures.

"But we are not to set out yet," said the servant; "it is but four miles
to Torre del Greco; the sbirri (officers of justice) are summoned--they
are to go with us--we must wait for them."

They waited, much against Arthur's inclination, a considerable time for
these sbirri.  At length they set out, and just as they reached the
villa, the flash of the pistol was seen from one of the apartments in the
house.  The robbers were there.  This pistol was snapped by their captain
at poor Francisco, who had bravely asserted that he would, as long as he
had life, defend the property committed to his care.  The pistol missed
fire, for it was charged with some of the damaged powder which the Jew
had bought that evening from the firework maker, and which he had sold as
excellent immediately afterwards to his favourite customers--the robbers
who met at his house.

Arthur, as soon as he perceived the flash of the piece, pressed forward
through all the apartments, followed by the count's servants and the
officers of justice.  At the sudden appearance of so many armed men, the
robbers stood dismayed.  Arthur eagerly shook Francisco's hand,
congratulating him upon his safety, and did not perceive, till he had
given him several rough friendly shakes, that his arm was wounded, and
that he was pale with the loss of blood.

"It is not much--only a slight wound," said Francisco; "one that I should
have escaped, if I had been upon my guard; but the sight of a face that I
little expected to see in such company took from me all presence of mind;
and one of the ruffians stabbed me here in the arm, whilst I stood in
stupid astonishment."

"Oh! take me to prison! take me to prison--I am weary of life--I am a
wretch not fit to live!" cried Piedro, holding his hands to be tied by
the sbirri.

The next morning Piedro was conveyed to prison; and as he passed through
the streets of Naples he was met by several of those who had known him
when he was a child.  "Ay," said they, as he went by, "his father
encouraged him in cheating when he was BUT A CHILD; and see what he is
come to, now he is a man!"  He was ordered to remain twelve months in
solitary confinement.  His captain and his accomplices were sent to the
galleys, and the Jew was banished from Naples.

And now, having got these villains out of the way, let us return to
honest Francisco.  His wound was soon healed.  Arthur was no bad surgeon,
for he let his patient get well as fast as he pleased; and Carlo and
Rosetta nursed him with so much kindness, that he was almost sorry to
find himself perfectly recovered.

"Now that you are able to go out," said Francisco's father to him, "you
must come and look at my new house, my dear son."

"Your new house, father?"

"Yes, son, and a charming one it is, and a handsome piece of land near
it--all at a safe distance, too, from Mount Vesuvius; and can you guess
how I came by it?--it was given to me for having a good son."

"Yes," cried Carlo; "the inhabitants of Resina, and several who had
property near Terre del Greco, and whose houses and lives were saved by
your intrepidity in carrying the materials for the fireworks and the
gunpowder out of this dangerous place, went in a body to the duke, and
requested that he would mention your name and these facts to the king,
who, amongst the grants he has made to the sufferers by the late eruption
of Mount Vesuvius, has been pleased to say that he gives this house and
garden to your father, because you have saved the property and lives of
many of his subjects."

The value of a handsome portion of furniture, plate, etc., in the Count
de Flora's villa, was, according to the count's promise, given to him;
and this money he divided between his own family and that of the good
carpenter who first put a pencil into his hands.  Arthur would not accept
of any present from him.  To Mr. Lee, the English gentleman, he offered
one of his own drawings--a fruit-piece.

"I like this very well," said Arthur, as he examined the drawing, "but I
should like this melon better if it was a little bruised.  It is now
three years ago since I was going to buy that bruised melon from you; you
showed me your honest nature then, though you were but a boy; and I have
found you the same ever since.  A good beginning makes a good ending--an
honest boy will make an honest man; and honesty is the best policy, as
you have proved to all who wanted the proof, I hope."

"Yes," added Francisco's father, "I think it is pretty plain that Piedro
the Cunning has not managed quite so well as Francisco the Honest."



TARLTON.

     Delightful task! to rear the tender thought,--
     To teach the young idea how to shoot,--
     To pour the fresh instruction o'er the mind,--
     To breathe th' enlivening spirit,--and to fix
     The generous purpose in the glowing breast.
                                               THOMSON.

Young Hardy was educated by Mr. Freeman, a very excellent master, at one
of our rural Sunday schools.  He was honest, obedient, active and good-
natured, hence he was esteemed by his master; and being beloved by all
his companions who were good, he did not desire to be loved by the bad;
nor was he at all vexed or ashamed when idle, mischievous or dishonest
boys attempted to plague or ridicule him.  His friend Loveit, on the
contrary, wished to be universally liked, and his highest ambition was to
be thought the best natured boy in the school--and so he was.  He usually
went by the name of POOR LOVEIT, and everybody pitied him when he got
into disgrace, which he frequently did, for though he had a good
disposition, he was led to do things which he knew to be wrong merely
because he could never have the courage to say "NO," because he was
afraid to offend the ill-natured, and could not bear to be laughed at by
fools.

One fine autumn evening, all the boys were permitted to go out to play in
a pleasant green meadow near the school.  Loveit and another boy, called
Tarlton, began to play a game of battledore and shuttlecock, and a large
party stood by to look on, for they were the best players at battledore
and shuttlecock in the school, and this was a trial of skill between
them.  When they had got it up to three hundred and twenty, the game
became very interesting.  The arms of the combatants tired that they
could scarcely wield the battledores.  The shuttlecock began to waver in
the air; now it almost touched the ground, and now, to the astonishment
of the spectators, mounted again high over their heads:  yet the strokes
became feebler and feebler; and "Now, Loveit!" "Now, Tarlton!" resounded
on all sides.  For another minute the victory was doubtful; but at length
the setting sun, shining full in Loveit's face, so dazzled his eyes that
he could no longer see the shuttlecock, and it fell at his feet.

After the first shout for Tarlton's triumph was over, everybody
exclaimed, "Poor Loveit! he's the best natured fellow in the world!  What
a pity that he did not stand with his back to the sun!"

"Now, I dare you all to play another game with me," cried Tarlton,
vauntingly; and as he spoke, he tossed the shuttlecock up with all his
force--with so much force that it went over the hedge and dropped into a
lane, which went close beside the field.  "Hey-day!" said Tarlton, "what
shall we do now?"

The boys were strictly forbidden to go into the lane; and it was upon
their promise not to break this command, that they were allowed to play
in the adjoining field.

No other shuttlecock was to be had and their play was stopped.  They
stood on the top of the bank, peeping over the hedge.  "I see it yonder,"
said Tarlton; "I wish somebody would get it.  One could get over the gate
at the bottom of the field, and be back again in half a minute," added
he, looking at Loveit.  "But you know we must not go into the lane," said
Loveit, hesitatingly.  "Pugh!" said Tarlton, "why, now, what harm could
it do?"

"I don't know," said Loveit, drumming upon his battledore; "but--"

"You don't know, man! why, then, what are you afraid of, I ask you?"
Loveit coloured, went on drumming, and again, in a lower voice, said "HE
DIDN'T KNOW."  But upon Tarlton's repeating, in a more insolent tone, "I
ask you, man, what you're afraid of?" he suddenly left off drumming, and
looking round, said, "he was not afraid of anything that he knew of."

"Yes, but you are," said Hardy, coming forward.

"Am I?" said Loveit; "of what, pray, am I afraid?"

"Of doing wrong!"

"Afraid OF DOING WRONG!" repeated Tarlton, mimicking him, so that he made
everybody laugh.  "Now, hadn't you better say afraid of being flogged?"

"No," said Hardy, coolly, after the laugh had somewhat subsided, "I am as
little afraid of being flogged as you are, Tarlton; but I meant--"

"No matter what you meant; why should you interfere with your wisdom and
your meanings; nobody thought of asking YOU to stir a step for us; but we
asked Loveit, because he's the best fellow in the world."

"And for that very reason you should not ask him, because, you know he
can't refuse you anything."

"Indeed, though," cried Loveit, piqued, "THERE you're mistaken, for I
could refuse if I chose it."

Hardy smiled; and Loveit, half afraid of his contempt, and half afraid of
Tarlton's ridicule, stood doubtful, and again had recourse to his
battledore, which he balanced most curiously upon his forefinger.  "Look
at him!--now do look at him!" cried Tarlton; "did you ever in your life
see anybody look so silly?--Hardy has him quite under his thumb; he's so
mortally afraid of Parson Prig, that he dare not, for the soul of him,
turn either of his eyes from the tip of his nose; look how he squints!"

