"I don't squint," said Loveit, looking up, "and nobody has me under his
thumb! and what Hardy said was only for fear I should get in disgrace;
he's the best friend I have."

Loveit spoke this with more than usual spirit, for both his heart and his
pride were touched.

"Come along, then," said Hardy, taking him by the arm in an affectionate
manner; and he was just going, when Tarlton called after him, "Ay, go
along with its best friend, and take care it does not get into a scrape;-
-good-bye, Little Panado!"

"Whom do they call Little Panado?" said Loveit, turning his head hastily
back.

"Never mind," said Hardy, "what does it signify?"

"No," said Loveit, "to be sure it does not signify; but one does not like
to be called Little Panado:  besides," added he, after going a few steps
farther, "they'll all think it so ill-natured.  I had better go back, and
just tell them that I'm very sorry I can't get their shuttlecock; do come
back with me."

"No," said Hardy, "I can't go back; and you'd better not."

"But, I assure you, I won't stay a minute; wait for me," added Loveit;
and he slunk back again to prove that he was not Little Panado.

Once returned, the rest followed, of course; for to support his character
of good-nature he was obliged to yield to the entreaties of his
companions, and to show his spirit, leapt over the gate, amidst the
acclamations of the little mob:--he was quickly out of sight.

"Here," cried he, returning in about five minutes, quite out of breath,
"I've got the shuttlecock; and I'll tell you what I've seen," cried he,
panting for breath.

"What?" cried everybody, eagerly.

"Why, just at the turn of the corner, at the end of the lane"--panting.

"Well," said Tarlton, impatiently, "do go on."

"Let me just take breath first."

"Pugh--never mind your breath."

"Well, then, just at the turn of the corner, at the end of the lane, as I
was looking about for the shuttlecock, I heard a great rustling somewhere
near me, and so I looked where it could come from; and I saw, in a nice
little garden, on the opposite side of the way, a boy, about as big as
Tarlton, sitting in a great tree, shaking the branches:  so I called to
the boy, to beg one; but he said he could not give me one, for that they
were his grandfather's; and just at that minute, from behind a gooseberry
bush, up popped the uncle; the grandfather poked his head out of the
window; so I ran off as fast as my legs would carry me though I heard him
bawling after me all the way."

"And let him bawl," cried Tarlton; "he shan't bawl for nothing; I'm
determined we'll have some of his fine large rosy apples before I sleep
to-night."

At this speech a general silence ensued; everybody kept their eyes fixed
upon Tarlton, except Loveit, who looked down, apprehensive that he should
be drawn on much farther than he intended.  "Oh, indeed!" said he to
himself, "as Hardy told me, I had better not have come back!"

Regardless of this confusion, Tarlton continued, "But before I say any
more, I hope we have no spies amongst us.  If there is any one of you
afraid to be flogged, let him march off this instant!"

Loveit coloured, bit his lips, wished to go, but had not the courage to
move first.  He waited to see what everybody else would do:  nobody
stirred; so Loveit stood still.

"Well, then," cried Tarlton, giving his hand to the boy next him, then to
the next, "your word and honour that you won't betray me; but stand by
me, and I'll stand by you."  Each boy gave his hand and his promise;
repeating, "Stand by me, and I'll stand by you."

Loveit hung back till the last; and had almost twisted off the button of
the boy's coat who screened him, when Tarlton came up, holding out his
hand, "Come, Loveit, lad, you're in for it:  stand by me, and I'll stand
by you."

"Indeed, Tarlton," expostulated he, without looking him in the face, "I
do wish you'd give up this scheme; I daresay all the apples are gone by
this time; I wish you would.  Do, pray, give up this scheme."

"What scheme, man? you have'n't heard it yet; you may as well know your
text before you begin preaching."

The corners of Loveit's mouth could not refuse to smile, though in his
heart he felt not the slightest inclination to laugh.

"Why, I don't know you, I declare I don't know you to-day," said Tarlton;
"you used to be the best natured most agreeable lad in the world, and
would do anything one asked you; but you're quite altered of late, as we
were saying just now, when you skulked away with Hardy:  come,--do, man,
pluck up a little spirit, and be one of us, or you'll make us all HATE
YOU."

"HATE me!" repeated Loveit, with terror; "no, surely, you won't all HATE
me!" and he mechanically stretched out his hand which Tarlton shook
violently, saying, "Ay, now, that's right."

"Ay, now, that's wrong!" whispered Loveit's conscience; but his
conscience was of no use to him, for it was always overpowered by the
voice of numbers; and though he had the wish, he never had the power, to
do right.  "Poor Loveit!  I knew he would not refuse us," cried his
companions; and even Tarlton, the moment he shook hands with him,
despised him.  It is certain that weakness of mind is despised both by
the good and the bad.

The league being thus formed, Tarlton assumed all the airs of commander,
explained his schemes, and laid the plan of attack upon the poor old
man's apple-tree.  It was the only one he had the world.  We shall not
dwell upon their consultation; for the amusement of contriving such
expeditions is often the chief thing which induces idle boys to engage in
them.

There was a small window at the end of the back staircase, through which,
between nine and ten o'clock at night, Tarlton, accompanied by Loveit and
another boy, crept out.  It was a moonlight night, and after crossing the
field, and climbing the gate, directed by Loveit, who now resolved to go
through the affair with spirit, they proceeded down the lane with rash
yet fearful steps.

At a distance Loveit saw the white washed cottage, and the apple-tree
beside it.  They quickened their pace, and with some difficulty scrambled
through the hedge which fenced the garden, though not without being
scratched and torn by the briers.  Everything was silent.  Yet now and
then, at every rustling of the leaves, they started, and their hearts
beat violently.  Once, as Loveit was climbing the apple-tree, he thought
he heard a door in the cottage open, and earnestly begged his companions
to desist and return home.  This, however, he could by no means persuade
them to do, until they had filled their pockets with apples; then, to his
great joy, they returned, crept in at the window and each retired, as
softly as possible, to his own apartment.

Loveit slept in the room with Hardy, whom he had left fast asleep, and
whom he now was extremely afraid of awakening.  All the apples were
emptied out of Loveit's pockets, and lodged with Tarlton till the
morning, for fear the smell should betray the secret to Hardy.  The room
door was apt to creak, but it was opened with such precaution, that no
noise could be heard, and Loveit found his friend as fast asleep as when
he left him.

"Ah," said he to himself, "how quietly he sleeps!  I wish I had been
sleeping too."  The reproaches of Loveit's conscience, however, served no
other purpose but to torment him; he had not sufficient strength of mind
to be good.  The very next night, in spite of all his fears, and all his
penitence, and all his resolutions, by a little fresh ridicule and
persuasion he was induced to accompany the same party on a similar
expedition.  We must observe, that the necessity for continuing their
depredations became stronger the third day; for, though at first only a
small party had been in the secret, by degrees it was divulged to the
whole school; and it was necessary to secure secrecy by sharing the
booty.

Everyone was astonished that Hardy, with all his quickness and
penetration, had not yet discovered their proceedings; but Loveit could
not help suspecting that he was not quite so ignorant as he appeared to
be.  Loveit had strictly kept his promise of secrecy; but he was by no
means an artful boy; and in talking to his friend, conscious that he had
something to conceal, he was perpetually on the point of betraying
himself; then recollecting his engagement, he blushed, stammered,
bungled; and upon Hardy's asking what he meant, would answer with a
silly, guilty countenance, that he did not know; or abruptly break off,
saying, "Oh nothing! nothing at all!"

It was in vain that he urged Tarlton to permit him to consult his friend.
A gloom overspread Tarlton's brow when he began to speak on the subject,
and he always returned a peremptory refusal, accompanied with some such
taunting expression as this--"I wish we had nothing to do with such a
sneaking fellow; he'll betray us all, I see, before we have done with
him."

"Well," said Loveit to himself, "so I am abused after all, and called a
sneaking fellow for my pains; that's rather hard, to be sure, when I've
got so little by the job."

In truth he had not got much; for in the division of the booty only one
apple, and half of another, which was only half ripe, happened to fall to
his share; though, to be sure, when they had all eaten their apples, he
had the satisfaction to hear everybody declare they were very sorry they
had forgotten to offer some of theirs to "POOR LOVEIT."

In the meantime, the visits to the apple-tree had been now too frequently
repeated to remain concealed from the old man who lived in the cottage.
He used to examine his only tree very frequently, and missing numbers of
rosy apples, which he had watched ripening, he, though not prone to
suspicion, began to think that there was something going wrong;
especially as a gap was made in his hedge, and there were several small
footsteps in his flower beds.

The good old man was not at all inclined to give pain to any living
creature, much less to children, of whom he was particularly fond.  Nor
was he in the least avaricious, for though he was not rich, he had enough
to live upon, because he had been very industrious in his youth; and he
was always very ready to part with the little he had.  Nor was he a cross
old man.  If anything would have made him angry, it would have been the
seeing his favourite tree robbed, as he had promised himself the pleasure
of giving his red apples to his grandchildren on his birthday.  However,
he looked up at the tree in sorrow rather than in anger, and leaning upon
his staff, he began to consider what he had best do.

"If I complain to their master," said he to himself, "they will certainly
be flogged, and that I should be sorry for:  yet they must not be let to
go on stealing; that would be worse still, for it would surely bring them
to the gallows in the end.  Let me see--oh, ay, that will do; I will
borrow farmer Kent's dog Barker, he'll keep them off, I'll answer for
it."

Farmer Kent lent his dog Barker, cautioning his neighbour, at the same
time, to be sure to chain him well, for he was the fiercest mastiff in
England.  The old man, with farmer Kent's assistance, chained him fast to
the trunk of the apple-tree.

Night came; and Tarlton, Loveit and his companions, returned at the usual
hour.  Grown bolder now by frequent success, they came on talking and
laughing.  But the moment they had set their foot in the garden, the dog
started up; and, shaking the chain as he sprang forward, barked with
unremitting fury.  They stood still as if fixed to the spot.  There was
just moonlight enough to see the dog.  "Let us try the other side of the
tree," said Tarlton.  But to whichever side they turned, the dog flew
round in an instant, barking with increased fury.

"He'll break his chain and tear us to pieces," cried Tarlton; and, struck
with terror, he immediately threw down the basket he had brought with
him, and betook himself to flight, with the greatest precipitation.
"Help me! oh, pray, help me!  I can't get through the hedge," cried
Loveit, in a lamentable tone, whilst the dog growled hideously, and
sprang forward to the extremity of his chain.  "I can't get out!  Oh, for
God's sake, stay for me one minute, dear Tarlton!"  He called in vain; he
was left to struggle through his difficulties by himself; and of all his
dear friends not one turned back to help him.  At last, torn and
terrified, he got through the hedge and ran home, despising his
companions for their selfishness.  Nor could he help observing that
Tarlton, with all his vaunted prowess, was the first to run away from the
appearance of danger.

The next morning Loveit could not help reproaching the party with their
conduct.  "Why could not you, any of you, stay one minute to help me?"
said he.

"We did not hear you call," answered one.

"I was so frightened," said another, "I would not have turned back for
the whole world."

"And you, Tarlton?"

"I," said Tarlton; "had not I enough to do to take care of myself, you
blockhead?  Everyone for himself in this world!"

"So I see," said Loveit, gravely.

"Well, man! is there anything strange in that?"

"Strange! why, yes; I thought you all loved me!"

"Lord love you, lad! so we do; but we love ourselves better."

"Hardy would not have served me so, however," said Loveit, turning away
in disgust.  Tarlton was alarmed.  "Pugh!" said he; "what nonsense have
you taken into your brain!  Think no more about it.  We are all very
sorry, and beg your pardon; come, shake hands, forgive and forget."

Loveit gave his hand, but gave it rather coldly.  "I forgive it with all
my heart," said he; "but I cannot forget it so soon!"

"Why, then, you are not such a good humoured fellow as we thought you
were.  Surely you cannot bear malice, Loveit."  Loveit smiled, and
allowed that he certainly could not bear malice.  "Well, then, come; you
know at the bottom we all love you, and would do anything in the world
for you."  Poor Loveit, flattered in his foible, began to believe that
they did love him at the bottom, as they said, and even with his eyes
open consented again to be duped.

"How strange it is," thought he, "that I should set such value upon the
love of those I despise!  When I'm once out of this scrape, I'll have no
more to do with them, I'm determined."

Compared with his friend Hardy, his new associates did indeed appear
contemptible; for all this time Hardy had treated him with uniform
kindness, avoided to pry into his secrets, yet seemed ready to receive
his confidence, if it had been offered.

After school in the evening, as he was standing silently beside Hardy,
who was ruling a sheet of paper for him, Tarlton, in his brutal manner,
came up, and seizing him by the arm, cried, "Come along with me, Loveit,
I've something to say to you."

"I can't come now," said Loveit, drawing away his arm.

"Ah, do come now," said Tarlton, in a voice of persuasion.

"Well, I'll come presently."

"Nay, but do, pray; there's a good fellow, come now, because I have
something to say to you."

"What is it you've got to say to me?  I wish you'd let me alone," said
Loveit; yet at the same time he suffered himself to he led away.

Tarlton took particular pains to humour him and bring him into temper
again; and even though he was not very apt to part with his playthings,
went so far as to say, "Loveit, the other day you wanted a top; I'll give
you mine if you desire it."

Loveit thanked him, and was overjoyed at the thought of possessing this
top.  "But what did you want to say to me just now?"

"Ay, we'll talk of that presently; not yet--when we get out of hearing."

"Nobody is near us," said Loveit.

"Come a little farther however," said Tarlton, looking round
suspiciously.

"Well now, well?"

"You know the dog that frightened us last night?"

"Yes."

"It will never frighten us again."

"Won't it? how so?"

"Look here," said Tarlton, drawing something from his pocket wrapped in a
blue handkerchief.

"What's that?"  Tarlton opened it.  "Raw meat!" exclaimed Loveit.  "How
came you by it?"

"Tom, the servant boy, Tom got it for me; and I'm to give him sixpence."

"And is it for the dog?"

"Yes; I vowed I'd be revenged on him, and after this he'll never bark
again."

"Never bark again!  What do you mean?  Is it poison?" exclaimed Loveit,
starting back with horror.

"Only poison for A DOG," said Tarlton, confused; "you could not look more
shocking if it was poison for a Christian."

Loveit stood for nearly a minute in profound silence.  "Tarlton," said he
at last, in a changed tone and altered manner, "I did not know you; I
will have no more to do with you."

"Nay, but stay," said Tarlton, catching hold of his arm, "stay; I was
only joking."

"Let go my arm--you were in earnest."

"But then that was before I knew there was any harm.  If you think
there's any harm?"

"IF," said Loveit.

"Why, you know, I might not know; for Tom told me it's a thing that's
often done.  Ask Tom."

"I'll ask nobody!  Surely we know better what's right and wrong than Tom
does."

"But only just ask him, to hear what he'll say."

"I don't want to hear what he'll say," cried Loveit, vehemently:  "the
dog will die in agonies--in agonies!  There was a dog poisoned at my
father's--I saw him in the yard.  Poor creature!  He lay and howled and
writhed himself!"

"Poor creature!  Well, there's no harm done now," cried Tarlton, in a
hypocritical tone.  But though he thought fit to dissemble with Loveit,
he was thoroughly determined in his purpose.

Poor Loveit, in haste to get away, returned to his friend Hardy; but his
mind was in such agitation, that he neither talked nor moved like
himself; and two or three times his heart was so full that he was ready
to burst into tears.

"How good-natured you are to me," said he to Hardy, as he was trying
vainly to entertain him; "but if you knew--"  Here he stopped short, for
the bell for evening prayer rang, and they all took their places, and
knelt down.  After prayers, as they were going to bed, Loveit stopped
Tarlton,--"WELL!" asked he, in an inquiring manner, fixing his eyes upon
him.

"WELL!" replied Tarlton, in an audacious tone, as if he meant to set his
inquiring eye at defiance.

"What do you mean to do to-night?"

"To go to sleep, as you do, I suppose," replied Tarlton, turning away
abruptly, and whistling as he walked off.

"Oh, he has certainly changed his mind!" said Loveit to himself, "else he
could not whistle."

About ten minutes after this, as he and Hardy were undressing, Hardy
suddenly recollected that he had left his new kite out upon the grass.
"Oh," said he, "it will be quite spoiled before morning!"

"Call Tom," said Loveit, "and bid him bring it in for you in a minute."
They both went to the top of the stairs to call Tom; no one answered.
They called again louder, "Is Tom below?"

"I'm here," answered he at last, coming out of Tarlton's room with a look
of mixed embarrassment and effrontery.  And as he was receiving Hardy's
commission, Loveit saw the corner of the blue handkerchief hanging out of
his pocket.  This excited fresh suspicions in Loveit's mind; but, without
saying one word, he immediately stationed himself at the window in his
room, which looked out towards the lane; and, as the moon was risen, he
could see if anyone passed that way.

"What are you doing there?" said Hardy, after he had been watching some
time; "why don't you come to bed?"  Loveit returned no answer, but
continued standing at the window.  Nor did he watch long in vain.
Presently he saw Tom gliding slowly along a by-path, and get over the
gate into the lane.

"He's gone to do it!" exclaimed Loveit aloud, with an emotion which he
could not command.

"Who's gone? to do what?" cried Hardy, starting up.

"How cruel! how wicked!" continued Loveit.

"What's cruel--what's wicked? speak out at once!" returned Hardy, in that
commanding tone which, in moments of danger, strong minds feel themselves
entitled to assume towards weak ones.  Loveit instantly, though in an
incoherent manner, explained the affair to him.  Scarcely had the words
passed his lips, when Hardy sprang up, and began dressing himself without
saying one syllable.

"For God's sake, what are you going to do?" said Loveit, in great
anxiety.  "They'll never forgive me! don't betray me! they'll never
forgive! pray, speak to me! only say you won't betray us."

"I will not betray you, trust to me," said Hardy:  and he left the room,
and Loveit stood in amazement; while, in the meantime, Hardy, in hopes of
overtaking Tom before the fate of the poor dog was decided, ran with all
possible speed across the meadow, then down the lane.  He came up with
Tom just as he was climbing the bank into the old man's garden.  Hardy,
too much out of breath to speak, seized hold of him, dragged him down,
detaining him with a firm grasp, whilst he panted for utterance.

"What, Master Hardy, is it you? what's the matter? what do you want?"

"I want the poisoned meat that you have in your pocket."

"Who told you that I had any such thing?" said Tom, clapping his hand
upon his guilty pocket.

"Give it me quietly, and I'll let you off."

"Sir, upon my word I haven't!  I didn't!  I don't know what you mean,"
said Tom, trembling, though he was by far the stronger of the two.
"Indeed, I don't know what you mean."

"You do," said Hardy, with great indignation:  and a violent struggle
immediately commenced.

The dog, now alarmed by the voices, began to bark outrageously.  Tom was
terrified lest the old man should come out to see what was the matter;
his strength forsook him, and flinging the handkerchief and meat over the
hedge, he ran away with all his speed.  The handkerchief fell within
reach of the dog, who instantly snapped at it; luckily it did not come
untied.  Hardy saw a pitchfork on a dunghill close beside him, and,
seizing upon it, stuck it into the handkerchief.  The dog pulled, tore,
growled, grappled, yelled; it was impossible to get the handkerchief from
between his teeth; but the knot was loosed, the meat, unperceived by the
dog, dropped out, and while he dragged off the handkerchief in triumph,
Hardy, with inexpressible joy, plunged the pitchfork into the poisoned
meat, and bore it away.

Never did hero retire with more satisfaction from a field of battle.
Full of the pleasure of successful benevolence, Hardy tripped joyfully
home, and vaulted over the window sill, when the first object he beheld
was Mr. Power, the usher, standing at the head of the stairs, with his
candle in his hand.

"Come up, whoever you are," said Mr. William Power, in a stern voice.  "I
thought I should find you out at last.  Come up, whoever you are!"  Hardy
obeyed without reply.--"Hardy!" exclaimed Mr. Power, starting back with
astonishment; "is it you, Mr. Hardy?" repeated he, holding the light to
his face.  "Why, sir," said he, in a sneering tone, "I'm sure if Mr.
Trueman was here he wouldn't believe his own eyes; but for my part I saw
through you long since; I never liked saints, for my share.  Will you
please to do me the favour, sir, if it is not too much trouble, to empty
your pockets."  Hardy obeyed in silence.  "Heyday! meat! raw meat! what
next?"

"That's all," said Hardy, emptying his pockets inside out.

"This is ALL," said Mr. Power, taking up the meat.

"Pray, sir," said Hardy, eagerly, "let that meat be burned, it is
poisoned."

"Poisoned!" cried Mr. William Power, letting it drop out of his fingers;
"you wretch!" looking at him with a menacing air:  "what is all this?
Speak."  Hardy was silent.  "Why don't you speak?" cried he, shaking him
by the shoulder impatiently.  Still Hardy was silent.  "Down upon your
knees this minute and confess all:  tell me where you've been, what
you've been doing, and who are your accomplices, for I know there is a
gang of you; so," added he, pressing heavily upon Hardy's shoulder, "down
upon your knees this minute, and confess the whole, that's your only way
now to get off yourself.  If you hope for MY pardon, I can tell you it's
not to be had without asking for."

"Sir," said Hardy, in a firm but respectful voice, "I have no pardon to
ask, I have nothing to confess; I am innocent; but if I were not, I would
never try to get off myself by betraying my companions."

"Very well, sir! very well! very fine! stick to it, stick to it, I advise
you, and we shall see.  And how will you look to-morrow, Mr. Innocent,
when my uncle, the doctor, comes home?"

"As I do now, sir," said Hardy, unmoved.

His composure threw Mr. Power into a rage too great for utterance.
"Sir," continued Hardy, "ever since I have been at school, I never told a
lie, and therefore, sir, I hope you will believe me now.  Upon my word
and honour, sir, I have done nothing wrong."

"Nothing wrong?  Better and better! what, when I caught you going out at
night?"

"THAT, to be sure, was wrong," said Hardy, recollecting himself; "but
except that--"

"Except that, sir! I will except nothing.  Come along with me, young
gentleman, your time for pardon is past."

Saying these words, he pulled Hardy along a narrow passage to a small
closet, set apart for desperate offenders, and usually known by the name
of the BLACK HOLE.  "There, sir, take up your lodging there for to-
night," said he, pushing him in; "tomorrow I'll know more, or I'll know
why," added he, double locking the door, with a tremendous noise, upon
his prisoner, and locking also the door at the end of the passage, so
that no one could have access to him.  "So now I think I have you safe!"
said Mr. William Power to himself, stalking off with steps which made the
whole gallery resound, and which made many a guilty heart tremble.

The conversation which had passed between Hardy and Mr. Power at the head
of the stairs had been anxiously listened to; but only a word or two here
and there had been distinctly overheard.

The locking of the black hole door was a terrible sound--some knew not
what it portended, and others knew TOO WELL.  All assembled in the
morning with faces of anxiety.  Tarlton and Loveit's were the most
agitated:  Tarlton for himself, Loveit for his friend, for himself, for
everybody.  Every one of the party, and Tarlton at their head, surrounded
him with reproaches; and considered him as the author of the evils which
hung over them.  "How could you do so? and why did you say anything to
Hardy about it? when you had promised, too!  Oh! what shall we all do?
what a scrape you have brought us into, Loveit, it's all your fault!"

"ALL MY FAULT!" repeated poor Loveit, with a sigh; "well, that is hard."

"Goodness! there's the bell," exclaimed a number of voices at once.  "Now
for it!"  They all stood in a half circle for morning prayers.  They
listened--"Here he is coming!  No--Yes--Here he is!"  And Mr. William
Power, with a gloomy brow, appeared and walked up to his place at the
head of the room.  They knelt down to prayers, and the moment they rose,
Mr. William Power, laying his hand upon the table, cried, "Stand still,
gentlemen, if you please."  Everybody stood stock still; he walked out of
the circle; they guessed that he was gone for Hardy, and the whole room
was in commotion.  Each with eagerness asked each what none could answer,
"HAS HE TOLD?"  "WHAT has he told?"  "Who has he told of?"  "I hope he
has not told of me," cried they.

"I'll answer for it he has told of all of us," said Tarlton.

"And I'll answer for it he has told of none of us," answered Loveit, with
a sigh.

"You don't think he's such a fool, when he can get himself off," said
Tarlton.

At this instant the prisoner was led in, and as he passed through the
circle, every eye was fixed upon him.  His eye fell upon no one, not even
upon Loveit, who pulled him by the coat as he passed--everyone felt
almost afraid to breathe.

"Well, sir," said Mr. Power, sitting down in Mr. Trueman's elbow-chair,
and placing the prisoner opposite to him; "well, sir, what have you to
say to me this morning?"

"Nothing, sir," answered Hardy, in a decided, yet modest manner; "nothing
but what I said last night."

"Nothing more?"

"Nothing more, sir."

"But I have something more to say to you, sir, then; and a great deal
more, I promise you, before I have done with you;" and then, seizing him
in a fury, he was just going to give him a severe flogging, when the
schoolroom door opened, and Mr. Trueman appeared, followed by an old man
whom Loveit immediately knew.  He leaned upon his stick as he walked, and
in his other hand carried a basket of apples.  When they came within the
circle, Mr. Trueman stopped short.  "Hardy!" exclaimed he, with a voice
of unfeigned surprise, whilst Mr. William Power stood with his hand
suspended.--"Ay, Hardy, sir," repeated he.  "I told him you'd not believe
your own eyes."

Mr. Trueman advanced with a slow step.  "Now, sir, give me leave," said
the usher, eagerly drawing him aside, and whispering.

"So, sir," said Mr. T. when the whisper was done, addressing himself to
Hardy, with a voice and manner which, had he been guilty, must have
pierced him to the heart, "I find I have been deceived in you; it is but
three hours ago that I told your uncle I never had a boy in my school in
whom I placed so much confidence; but, after all this show of honour and
integrity, the moment my back is turned, you are the first to set an
example of disobedience of my orders.  Why do I talk of disobeying my
commands--you are a thief!"

"I, sir?" exclaimed Hardy, no longer able to repress his feelings.

"You, sir,--you and some others," said Mr. Trueman, looking round the
room with a penetrating glance--"you and some others."

"Ay, sir," interrupted Mr. William Power, "get that out of him if you
can--ask him."

"I will ask him nothing; I shall neither put his truth nor his honour to
the trial; truth and honour are not to be expected amongst thieves."

"I am not a thief!  I have never had anything to do with thieves," cried
Hardy, indignantly.

"Have you not robbed this old man?  Don't you know the taste of these
apples?" said Mr. Trueman, taking one out of the basket.

"No, sir; I do not.  I never touched one of that old man's apples."

"Never touched one of them!  I suppose this is some vile equivocation;
you have done worse, you have had the barbarity, the baseness, to attempt
to poison his dog; the poisoned meat was found in your pocket last
night."

"The poisoned meat was found in my pocket, sir; but I never intended to
poison the dog--I saved his life."

"Lord bless him!" said the old man.

"Nonsense--cunning!" said Mr. Power.  "I hope you won't let him impose
upon you, sir."

"No, he cannot impose upon me; I have a proof he is little prepared for,"
said Mr. Trueman, producing the blue handkerchief in which the meat had
been wrapped.

Tarlton turned pale; Hardy's countenance never changed.

"Don't you know this handkerchief, sir?"

"I do, sir."

"Is it not yours?"

"No, sir."

"Don't you know whose it is?" cried Mr. Power.  Hardy was silent.

"Now, gentlemen," said Mr. Trueman, "I am not fond of punishing you; but
when I do it, you know, it is always in earnest.  I will begin with the
eldest of you; I will begin with Hardy, and flog you with my own hands
till this handkerchief is owned."

"I'm sure it's not mine," and "I'm sure it's none of mine," burst from
every mouth, whilst they looked at each other in dismay; for none but
Hardy, Loveit and Tarlton knew the secret.  "My cane," said Mr. Trueman,
and Mr. Power handed him the cane.  Loveit groaned from the bottom of his
heart.  Tarlton leaned back against the wall with a black countenance.
Hardy looked with a steady eye at the cane.

"But first," said Mr. Trueman, laying down the cane, "let us see.
Perhaps we may find out the owner of this handkerchief another way,"
examining the corners.  It was torn almost to pieces; but luckily the
corner that was marked remained.

"J. T.!" cried Mr. Trueman.  Every eye turned upon the guilty Tarlton,
who, now as pale as ashes and trembling in every limb, sank down upon his
knees, and in a whining voice begged for mercy.  "Upon my word and
honour, sir, I'll tell you all; I'd never have thought of stealing the
apples if Loveit had not first told me of them; and it was Tom who first
put the poisoning the dog into my head.  It was he that carried the meat,
WASN'T IT?" said he, appealing to Hardy, whose word he knew must be
believed.  "Oh, dear sir!" continued he as Mr. Trueman began to move
towards him, "do let me off; pray do let me off this time!  I'm not the
only one, indeed, sir! I hope you won't make me an example for the rest.
It's very hard I'm to be flogged more than they!"

"I'm not going to flog you."

"Thank you, sir," said Tarlton, getting up and wiping his eyes.

"You need not thank me," said Mr. Trueman.  "Take your handkerchief--go
out of this room--out of this house; let me never see you more."

"If I had any hopes of him," said Mr. Trueman, as he shut the door after
him;--"if I had any hopes of him, I would have punished him;--but I have
none.  Punishment is meant only to make people better; and those who have
any hopes of themselves will know how to submit to it."

At these words Loveit first, and immediately all the rest of the guilty
party, stepped out of the ranks, confessed their fault, and declared
themselves ready to bear any punishment their master thought proper.

"Oh, they have been punished enough," said the old man; "forgive them,
sir."

Hardy looked as if he wished to speak.  "Not because you ask it," said
Mr. Trueman to the guilty penitents, "though I should be glad to oblige
you--it wouldn't be just; but there," pointing to Hardy, "there is one
who has merited a reward; the highest I can give him is that of pardoning
his companions."

Hardy bowed and his face glowed with pleasure, whilst everybody present
sympathized in his feelings.

"I am sure," thought Loveit, "this is a lesson I shall never forget."

"Gentlemen," said the old man, with a faltering voice, "it wasn't for the
sake of my apples that I spoke; and you, sir," said he to Hardy, "I thank
you for saving my dog.  If you please, I'll plant on that mount, opposite
the window, a young apple-tree, from my old one.  I will water it, and
take care of it with my own hands for your sake, as long as I am able.
And may God bless you!" laying his trembling hand on Hardy's head; "may
God bless you--I'm sure God WILL bless all such boys as you are."



THE BASKET-WOMAN.

     "Toute leur etude etait de se complaire et de s'entr'aider." *
                                              PAUL ET VIRGINIE.

At the foot of a steep, slippery, white hill, near Dunstable, in
Bedfordshire, called Chalk Hill, there is a hut, or rather a hovel, which
travellers could scarcely suppose could be inhabited, if they did not see
the smoke rising from its peaked roof.  An old woman lives in this hovel,
** and with her a little boy and girl, the children of a beggar who died,
and left these orphans perishing with hunger.  They thought themselves
very happy when the good old woman first took them into her hut and bid
them warm themselves at her small fire, and gave them a crust of mouldy
bread to eat.  She had not much to give, but what she had she gave with
good-will.  She was very kind to these poor children, and worked hard at
her spinning-wheel and at her knitting, to support herself and them.  She
earned money also in another way.  She used to follow all the carriages
as they went up Chalk Hill, and when the horses stopped to take breath or
to rest themselves, she put stones behind the carriage wheels to prevent
them from rolling backwards down the steep, slippery hill.

* "Their whole study was how to please and to help one another."
** This was about the close of the 18th century.

The little boy and girl loved to stand beside the good natured old
woman's spinning-wheel when she was spinning, and to talk to her.  At
these times she taught them something, which, she said, she hoped they
would remember all their lives.  She explained to them what is meant by
telling the truth, and what it is to be honest.  She taught them to
dislike idleness, and to wish that they could be useful.

One evening, as they were standing beside her, the little boy said to
her, "Grandmother," for that was the name by which she liked that these
children should call her--"grandmother, how often you are forced to get
up from your spinning-wheel, and to follow the chaises and coaches up
that steep hill, to put stones underneath the wheels, to hinder them from
rolling back!  The people who are in the carriages give you a halfpenny
or a penny for doing this, don't they?"

"Yes, child."

"But it is very hard work for you to go up and down that hill.  You often
say that you are tired, and then you know that you cannot spin all that
time.  Now if we might go up the hill, and put the stones behind the
wheels, you could sit still at your work, and would not the people give
us the halfpence? and could not we bring them all to you?  Do, pray, dear
grandmother, try us for one day--to-morrow, will you?"

"Yes," said the old woman; "I will try what you can do; but I must go up
the hill along with you for the first two or three times, for fear you
should get yourselves hurt."

So, the next day, the little boy and girl went with their grandmother, as
they used to call her, up the steep hill; and she showed the boy how to
prevent the wheels from rolling back, by putting stones behind them; and
she said, "This is called scotching the wheels;" and she took off the
boy's hat and gave it to the little girl, to hold up to the carriage-
windows, ready for the halfpence.

When she thought that the children knew how to manage by themselves, she
left them, and returned to her spinning-wheel.  A great many carriages
happened to go by this day, and the little girl received a great many
halfpence.  She carried them all in her brother's hat to her grandmother
in the evening; and the old woman smiled, and thanked the children.  She
said that they had been useful to her, and that her spinning had gone on
finely, because she had been able to sit still at her wheel all day.
"But, Paul my boy," said she, "what is the matter with your hand?"

"Only a pinch--only one pinch that I got, as I was putting a stone behind
a wheel of a chaise.  It does not hurt me much, grandmother; and I've
thought of a good thing for to-morrow.  I shall never be hurt again, if
you will only be so good as to give me the old handle of the broken
crutch, grandmother, and the block of wood that lies in the chimney-
corner, and that is of no use.  I'll make it of some use, if I may have
it."

"Take it then, dear," said the old woman; "and you'll find the handle of
the broken crutch under my bed."

Paul went to work immediately, and fastened one end of the pole into the
block of wood, so as to make something like a dry-rubbing brush.  "Look,
grandmamma, look at my SCOTCHER.  I call this thing my SCOTCHER," said
Paul, "because I shall always scotch the wheels with it.  I shall never
pinch my fingers again; my hands, you see, will be safe at the end of
this long stick; and, sister Anne, you need not be at the trouble of
carrying any more stones after me up the hill; we shall never want stones
any more.  My scotcher will do without anything else, I hope.  I wish it
was morning, and that a carriage would come, that I might run up the
hill, and try my scotcher."

"And I wish that as many chaises may go by to-morrow as there did to-day,
and that we may bring you as many halfpence, grandmother," said the
little girl.

"So do I, my dear Anne," said the old woman; "for I mean that you and
your brother shall have all the money that you get to-morrow.  You may
buy some gingerbread for yourselves, or some of those ripe plums that you
saw at the fruit-stall the other day, which is just going into Dunstable.
I told you then that I could not afford to buy such things for you; but
now that you can earn halfpence for yourselves, children, it is fair
should taste a ripe plum and bit of gingerbread for once and a way in
your lives."

"We'll bring some of the gingerbread home to her, shan't we, brother?"
whispered little Anne.  The morning came;  but no carriages were heard,
though Paul and his sister had risen at five o'clock, that they might be
sure to be ready for early travellers.  Paul kept his scotcher poised
upon his shoulder, and watched eagerly at his station at the bottom of
the hill.  He did not wait long before a carriage came.  He followed it
up the hill; and the instant the postillion called to him, and bid him
stop the wheels, he put his scotcher behind them, and found that it
answered the purpose perfectly well.

Many carriages went by this day, and Paul and Anne received a great many
halfpence from the travellers.

When it grew dusk in the evening, Anne said to her brother--"I don't
think any more carriages will come by to-day.  Let us count the
halfpence, and carry them home now to grandmother."

"No, not yet," answered Paul, "let them alone--let them lie still in the
hole where I have put them.  I daresay more carriages will come by before
it is quite dark, and then we shall have more halfpence."

Paul had taken the halfpence out of his hat, and he had put them into a
hole in the high bank by the roadside; and Anne said she would not meddle
with them, and that she would wait till her brother liked to count them;
and Paul said--"If you will stay and watch here, I will go and gather
some blackberries for you in the hedge in yonder field.  Stand you
hereabouts, half-way up the hill, and the moment you see any carriage
coming along the road, run as fast as you can and call me."

Anne waited a long time, or what she thought a long time; and she saw no
carriage, and she trailed her brother's scotcher up and down till she was
tired.  Then she stood still, and looked again, and she saw no carriage;
so she went sorrowfully into the field, and to the hedge where her
brother was gathering blackberries, and she said, "Paul, I'm sadly tired,
SADLY TIRED!" said she, "and my eyes are quite strained with looking for
chaises; no more chaises will come to-night; and your scotcher is lying
there, of no use, upon the ground.  Have not I waited long enough for to-
day, Paul?"

"Oh, no," said Paul; "here are some blackberries for you; you had better
wait a little bit longer.  Perhaps a carriage might go by whilst you are
standing here talking to me."

Anne, who was of a very obliging temper, and who liked to do what she was
asked to do, went back to the place where the scotcher lay; and scarcely
had she reached the spot, when she heard the noise of a carriage.  She
ran to call her brother, and to their great joy, they now saw four
chaises coming towards them.  Paul, as soon as they went up the hill,
followed with his scotcher; first he scotched the wheels of one carriage,
then of another; and Anne was so much delighted with observing how well
the scotcher stopped the wheels, and how much better it was than stones,
that she forgot to go and hold her brother's hat to the travellers for
halfpence, till she was roused by the voice of a little rosy girl, who
was looking out of the window of one of the chaises.  "Come close to the
chaise-door," said the little girl; "here are some halfpence for you."

Anne held the hat; and she afterwards went on to the other carriages.
Money was thrown to her from each of them; and when they had all gotten
safely to the top of the hill, she and her brother sat down upon a large
stone by the roadside, to count their treasure.  First they began by
counting what was in the hat--"One, two, three, four halfpence."

"But, oh, brother, look at this!" exclaimed Anne; "this is not the same
as the other halfpence."

"No, indeed, it is not," cried Paul, "it is no halfpenny; it is a guinea,
a bright golden guinea!"

"Is it?" said Anne, who had never seen a guinea in her life before, and
who did not know its value; "and will it do as well as a halfpenny to buy
gingerbread?  I'll run to the fruit-stall, and ask the woman; shall I?"

"No, no," said Paul, "you need not ask any woman, or anybody but me; I
can tell you all about it, as well as anybody in the whole world."

"The whole world!  Oh, Paul, you forgot.  Not so well as my grandmother."

"Why, not so well as my grandmother, perhaps, but, Anne, I can tell you
that you must not talk yourself, Anne, but you must listen to me quietly,
or else you won't understand what I am going to tell you, for I can
assure you that I don't think I quite understood it myself, Anne, the
first time my grandmother told it to me, though I stood stock still
listening my best."

Prepared by this speech to hear something very difficult to be
understood, Anne looked very grave, and her brother explained to her,
that, with a guinea, she might buy two hundred and fifty-two times as
many plums as she could get for a penny.

"Why, Paul, you know the fruit-woman said she would give us a dozen plums
for a penny.  Now, for this little guinea, would she give us two hundred
and fifty-two dozen?"

"If she has so many, and if we like to have so many, to be sure she
will," said Paul, "but I think we should not like to have two hundred and
fifty-two dozen of plums; we could not eat such a number."

"But we could give some of them to my grandmother," said Anne.

"But still there would be too many for her, and for us, too," said Paul,
"and when we had eaten the plums, there would be an end to all the
pleasure.  But now I'll tell you what I am thinking of, Anne, that we
might buy something for my grandmother, that would be very useful to her
indeed, with the guinea--something that would last a great while."

"What, brother?  What sort of thing?"

"Something that she said she wanted very much last winter, when she was
so ill with the rheumatism--something that she said yesterday, when you
were making her bed, she wished she might be able to buy before next
winter."

"I know, I know what you mean!" said Anne--"a blanket.  Oh, yes, Paul,
that will be much better than plums; do let us buy a blanket for her; how
glad she will be to see it!  I will make her bed with the new blanket,
and then bring her to see it.  But, Paul, how shall we buy a blanket?
Where are blankets to be got?"

"Leave that to me, I'll manage that.  I know where blankets can be got.
I saw one hanging out of a shop the day I went last to Dunstable."

"You have seen a great many things at Dunstable, brother."

"Yes, a great many; but I never saw anything there or anywhere else, that
I wished for half so much as I did for the blanket for my grandmother.
Do you remember how she used to shiver with the cold last winter?  I'll
buy the blanket to-morrow.  I'm going to Dunstable with her spinning."

"And you'll bring the blanket to me, and I shall make the bed very
neatly, that will be all right--all happy!" said Anne, clapping her
hands.

"But stay!  Hush! don't clap your hands so, Anne; it will not be all
happy, I'm afraid," said Paul, and his countenance changed, and he looked
very grave.  "It will not be all right, I'm afraid, for there is one
thing we have neither of us thought of, but that we ought to think about.
We cannot buy the blanket, I'm afraid."

"Why, Paul, why?"

"Because I don't think this guinea is honestly ours."

"Nay, brother, but I'm sure it is honestly ours.  It was given to us, and
grandmother said all that was given to us to-day was to be our own."

"But who gave it to you, Anne?"

"Some of the people in those chaises, Paul.  I don't know which of them,
but I daresay it was the little rosy girl."

"No," said Paul, "for when she called you to the chaise door, she said,
'Here's some halfpence for you.'  Now, if she gave you the guinea, she
must have given it to you by mistake."

"Well, but perhaps some of the people in the other chaises gave it to me,
