reason to be displeased with you."

The housekeeper, when she first came in, appeared with a smiling
countenance; but the moment she cast her eyes on Franklin, it changed to
a look of surprise and suspicion.  Her mistress recommended him to her
protection, saying, "Pomfret, I hope you will keep this boy under your
own eye."  And she received him with a cold "Very well, ma'am," which
plainly showed that she was not disposed to like him.  In fact, Mrs.
Pomfret was a woman so fond of power, and so jealous of favour, that she
would have quarrelled with an angel who had got so near her mistress
without her introduction.  She smothered her displeasure, however, till
night; when, as she attended her mistress' toilette, she could not
refrain from expressing her sentiments.  She began cautiously:  "Ma'am,
is not this the boy Mr. Spencer was talking of one day--that has been
brought up by the VILLAINTROPIC SOCIETY, I think they call it?"

"Philanthropic Society; yes," said her mistress; "and my brother gives
him a high character:  I hope he will do very well."

"I'm sure I hope so too," observed Mrs. Pomfret; "but I can't say; for my
part, I've no great notion of those low people.  They say all those
children are taken from the very lowest DRUGS and REFUGES of the town,
and surely they are like enough, ma'am, to take after their own fathers
and mothers."

"But they are not suffered to be with their parents," rejoined the lady;
"and therefore cannot be hurt by their example.  This little boy, to be
sure, was unfortunate in his father, but he has had an excellent
education."

"Oh, EDICATION! to be sure, ma'am, I know.  I don't say but what
edication is a great thing.  But then, ma'am, edication can't change the
NATUR that's in one, they say; and one's that born naturally bad and low,
they say, all the edication in the world won't do no good; and, for my
part, ma'am, I know you knows best; but I should be afraid to let any of
those Villaintropic folks get into my house; for nobody can tell the
natur of them aforehand.  I declare it frights me."

"Pomfret, I thought you had better sense:  how would this poor boy earn
his bread? he would be forced to starve or steal, if everybody had such
prejudices."

Pomfret, who really was a good woman, was softened at this idea, and
said, "God forbid he should starve or steal, and God forbid I should say
anything PREJUDICIARY of the boy; for there may be no harm in him."

"Well," said Mrs. Churchill, changing her tone, "but, Pomfret, if we
don't like the boy at the end of the month, we have done with him; for I
have only promised Mr. Spencer to keep him a month upon trial:  there is
no harm done."

"Dear, no, ma'am, to be sure; and cook must put up with her
disappointment, that's all."

"What disappointment?"

"About her nephew, ma'am; the boy she and I was speaking to you for."

"When?"

"The day you called her up about the almond pudding, ma'am.  If you
remember, you said you should have no objections to try the boy; and upon
that cook bought him new shirts; but they are to the good, as I tell
her."

"But I did not promise to take her nephew."

"O, no ma'am, not at all; she does not think to SAY THAT, else I should
be very angry; but the poor woman never let fall a word, any more than
frets that the boy should miss such a good place."

"Well, but since I did say that I should have no objection to try him, I
shall keep my word; let him come to-morrow.  Let them both have a fair
trial, and at the end of the month I can decide which I like best, and
which we had better keep."

Dismissed with these orders, Mrs. Pomfret hastened to report all that had
passed to the cook, like a favourite minister, proud to display the
extent of her secret influence.  In the morning Felix, the cook's nephew,
arrived; and, the moment he came into the kitchen, every eye, even the
scullion's, was fixed upon him with approbation, and afterwards glanced
upon Franklin with contempt--contempt which Franklin could not endure
without some confusion, though quite unconscious of having deserved it;
nor, upon the most impartial and cool self-examination, could he
comprehend the justice of his judges.  He perceived indeed--for the
comparisons were minutely made in audible and scornful whispers--that
Felix was a much handsomer, or as the kitchen maid expressed it, a much
more genteeler gentlemanly looking like sort of person than he was; and
he was made to understand, that he wanted a frill to his shirt, a cravat,
a pair of thin shoes, and, above all, shoe strings, besides other
nameless advantages, which justly made his rival the admiration of the
kitchen.  However, upon calling to mind all that his friend Mr. Spencer
had ever said to him, he could not recollect his having warned him that
shoe strings were indispensable requisites to the character of a good
servant; so that he could only comfort himself with resolving, if
possible, to make amends for these deficiencies, and to dissipate the
prejudices which he saw were formed against him, by the strictest
adherence to all that his tutor had taught him to be his duty.  He hoped
to secure the approbation of his mistress by scrupulous obedience to all
her commands, and faithful care of all that belonged to her.  At the same
time he flattered himself he should win the goodwill of his fellow
servants by showing a constant desire to oblige them.  He pursued this
plan of conduct steadily for nearly three weeks, and found that he
succeeded beyond his expectations in pleasing his mistress; but
unfortunately he found it more difficult to please his fellow servants,
and he sometimes offended when he least expected it.  He had made great
progress in the affections of Corkscrew, the butler, by working indeed
very hard for him, and doing every day at least half his business.  But
one unfortunate night the butler was gone out; the bell rang:  he went
upstairs; and his mistress asking where Corkscrew was, he answered that
he was gone out.  "Where to!" said his mistress.  "I don't know,"
answered Franklin.  And, as he had told exactly the truth, and meant to
do no harm, he was surprised, at the butler's return, when he repeated to
him what had passed, at receiving a sudden box on the ear, and the
appellation of a mischievous, impertinent, mean-spirited brat.

"Mischievous, impertinent, mean!" repeated Franklin to himself; but,
looking in the butler's face, which was a deeper scarlet than usual, he
judged that he was far from sober, and did not doubt but that the next
morning, when he came to the use of his reason, he would be sensible of
his injustice, and apologize for his box of the ear.  But no apology
coming all day, Franklin at last ventured to request an explanation, or
rather, to ask what he had best do on the next occasion.

"Why," said Corkscrew, "when mistress asked for me, how came you to say I
was gone out?"

"Because, you know, I saw you go out."

"And when she asked you where I was gone, how came you to say that you
did not know?"

"Because, indeed, I did not."

"You are a stupid blockhead! could you not say I was gone to the
washerwoman's?"

"But WERE you?" said Franklin.

"Was I?" cried Corkscrew, and looked as if he would have struck him
again; "how dare you give me the lie, Mr. Hypocrite?  You would be ready
enough, I'll be bound, to make excuses for yourself.  Why are not
mistress' clogs cleaned?  Go along and blacken 'em, this minute, and send
Felix to me."

From this time forward Felix alone was privileged to enter the butler's
pantry.  Felix became the favourite of Corkscrew; and, though Franklin by
no means sought to pry into the mysteries of their private conferences,
nor ever entered without knocking at the door, yet it was his fate once
to be sent of a message at an unlucky time; and, as the door was half
open, he could not avoid seeing Felix drinking a bumper of red liquor,
which he could not help suspecting to be wine; and, as the decanter,
which usually went upstairs after dinner, was at this time in the
butler's grasp, without any stopper in it, he was involuntarily forced to
suspect they were drinking his mistress' wine.

Nor were the bumpers of port the only unlawful rewards which Felix
received:  his aunt, the cook, had occasion for his assistance, and she
had many delicious douceurs in her gift.  Many a handful of currants,
many a half-custard, many a triangular remnant of pie, besides the choice
of his own meal at breakfast, dinner and supper, fell to the share of the
favourite Felix; whilst Franklin was neglected, though he took the utmost
pains to please the cook in all honourable service, and, when she was
hot, angry, or hurried, he was always at hand to help her; and in the
hour of adversity, when the clock struck five, and no dinner was dished,
and no kitchen maid with twenty pair of hands was to be had, Franklin
would answer to her call, with flowers to garnish her dishes, and
presence of mind to know, in the midst of the commotion, where everything
that was wanting was to be found; so that, quick as lightning, all
difficulties vanished before him.  Yet when the danger was over, and the
hour of adversity had past, the ungrateful cook would forget her
benefactor, and, when it came to his supper time, would throw him, with a
carelessness that touched him sensibly, anything which the other servants
were too nice to eat.  All this Franklin bore with fortitude; nor did he
envy Felix the dainties which he ate, sometimes close beside him:  "For,"
said he to himself, "I have a clear conscience, and that is more than
Felix can have.  I know how he wins cook's favour too well, and I fancy I
know how I have offended her; for since the day I saw the basket, she has
done nothing but huff me."

The history of the basket was this.  Mrs. Pomfret, the housekeeper, had
several times, directly and indirectly, given the world below to
understand that she and her mistress thought there was a prodigious
quantity of meat eaten of late.  Now, when she spoke, it was usually at
dinner time; she always looked, or Franklin imagined that she looked,
suspiciously at him.  Other people looked more maliciously; but, as he
felt himself perfectly innocent, he went on eating his dinner in silence.

But at length it was time to explain.  One Sunday there appeared a
handsome sirloin of beef, which before noon on Monday had shrunk almost
to the bare bone, and presented such a deplorable spectacle to the
opening eyes of Mrs. Pomfret that her long smothered indignation burst
forth, and she boldly declared she was now certain there had been foul
play, and she would have the beef found, or she would know why.  She
spoke, but no beef appeared, till Franklin, with a look of sudden
recollection, cried, "Did not I see something like a piece of beef in a
basket in the dairy?--I think--"

The cook, as if somebody had smote her a deadly blow, grew pale; but,
suddenly recovering the use of her speech, turned upon Franklin, and,
with a voice of thunder, gave him the lie direct; and forthwith, taking
Mrs. Pomfret by the ruffle, led the way to the dairy, declaring she could
defy the world--"that so she could, and would."  "There, ma'am," said she
kicking an empty basket which lay on the floor--"there's malice for you.
Ask him why he don't show you the beef in the basket."

"I thought I saw--" poor Franklin began.

"You thought you saw!" cried the cook, coming close up to him with
kimboed arms, and looking like a dragon; "and pray, sir, what business
has such a one as you to think you see?  And pray, ma'am, will you be
pleased to speak--perhaps, ma'am, he'll condescend to obey you--ma'am,
will you be pleased to forbid him my dairy? for here he comes prying and
spying about; and how, ma'am, am I to answer for my butter and cream, or
anything at all?  I'm sure it's what I can't pretend to, unless you do me
the justice to forbid him my places."

Mrs. Pomfret, whose eyes were blinded by her prejudices against the folks
of the "Villaintropic Society," and also by her secret jealousy of a boy
whom she deemed to be a growing favourite of her mistress', took part
with the cook, and ended, as she began, with a firm persuasion that
Franklin was the guilty person.  "Let him alone, let him alone!" said
she; "he has as many turns and windings as a hare; but we shall catch him
yet, I'll be bound, in some of his doublings.  I knew the nature of him
well enough, from the first time I ever set my eyes upon him; but
mistress shall have her own way, and see the end of it."

These words, and the bitter sense of injustice, drew tears at length fast
down the proud cheek of Franklin, which might possibly have touched Mrs.
Pomfret, if Felix, with a sneer, had not called them CROCODILE TEARS.
"Felix, too!" thought he; "this is too much."  In fact, Felix had till
now professed himself his firm ally, and had on his part received from
Franklin unequivocal proofs of friendship; for it must be told that every
other morning, when it was Felix's turn to get breakfast, Felix never was
up in decent time, and must inevitably have come to public disgrace if
Franklin had not got all the breakfast things ready for him, the bread
and butter spread, and the toast toasted; and had not, moreover,
regularly, when the clock struck eight, and Mrs. Pomfret's foot was heard
overhead, run to call the sleeping Felix, and helped him constantly
through the hurry of getting dressed one instant before the housekeeper
came downstairs.  All this could not but be present to his memory; but,
seeming to reproach him, Franklin wiped away his crocodile tears, and
preserved a magnanimous silence.

The hour of retribution was, however, not so far off as Felix imagined.
Cunning people may go on cleverly in their devices for some time; but
although they may escape once, twice, perhaps ninety-nine times, what
does that signify?--for the hundredth time they come to shame, and lose
all their character.  Grown bold by frequent success, Felix became more
careless in his operations; and it happened that one day he met his
mistress full in the passage, as he was going on one of the cook's secret
errands.

"Where are you going, Felix?" said his mistress.

"To the washerwoman's, ma'am," answered he, with his usual effrontery.

"Very well," said she.  "Call at the bookseller's in--stay, I must write
down the direction.  Pomfret," said she, opening the housekeeper's room
door, "have you a bit of paper?"  Pomfret came with the writing-paper,
and looked very angry to see that Felix was going out without her
knowledge; so, while Mrs. Churchill was writing the direction, she stood
talking to him about it; whilst he, in the greatest terror imaginable,
looked up in her face as she spoke; but was all the time intent on
parrying on the other side the attacks of a little French dog of his
mistress', which, unluckily for him, had followed her into the passage.
Manchon was extremely fond of Felix, who, by way of pleasing his
mistress, had paid most assiduous court to her dog; yet now his caresses
were rather troublesome.  Manchon leaped up, and was not to be rebuffed.
"Poor fellow--poor fellow--down! down!  poor fellow!" cried Felix, and
put him away.  But Manchon leaped up again, and began smelling near the
fatal pocket in a most alarming manner.  "You will see by this direction
where you are to go," said his mistress.  "Manchon, come here--and you
will be so good as to bring me--down! down! Manchon, be quiet!"  But
Manchon knew better--he had now got his head into Felix's pocket, and
would not be quiet till he had drawn from thence, rustling out of its
brown paper, half a cold turkey, which had been missing since morning.

"My cold turkey, as I'm alive!" exclaimed the housekeeper, darting upon
it with horror and amazement.

"What is all this?" said Mrs. Churchill, in a composed voice.

"I don't know, ma'am," answered Felix, so confused that he knew not what
to say; "but--"

"But what?" cried Mrs. Pomfret, indignation flashing from her eyes.  "But
what?" repeated his mistress, waiting for his reply with a calm air of
attention, which still more disconcerted Felix; for, though with an angry
person he might have some chance of escape, he knew that he could not
invent any excuse in such circumstances, which could stand the
examination of a person in her sober senses.  He was struck dumb.
"Speak," said Mrs. Churchill, in a still lower tone; "I am ready to hear
all you have to say.  In my house everybody shall have justice; speak--
but what?"

"BUT," stammered Felix; and, after in vain attempting to equivocate,
confessed that he was going to take the turkey to his cousin's; but he
threw all the blame upon his aunt, the cook, who, he said, had ordered
him upon this expedition.

The cook was now summoned; but she totally denied all knowledge of the
affair, with the same violence with which she had lately confounded
Franklin about the beef in the basket; not entirely, however, with the
same success; for Felix, perceiving by his mistress' eye that she was on
the point of desiring him to leave the house immediately; and not being
very willing to leave a place in which he had lived so well with the
butler, did not hesitate to confront his aunt with assurance equal to her
own.  He knew how to bring his charge home to her.  He produced a note in
her own handwriting, the purport of which was to request her cousin's
acceptance of "some DELICATE COLD TURKEY," and to beg she would send her,
by the return of the bearer, a little of her cherry-brandy.

Mrs. Churchill coolly wrote upon the back of the note her cook's
discharge, and informed Felix she had no further occasion for his
services, but, upon his pleading with many tears, which Franklin did not
call CROCODILE TEARS, that he was so young, that he was under the
dominion of his aunt, he touched Mrs. Pomfret's compassion, and she
obtained for him permission to stay till the end of the month, to give
him yet a chance of redeeming his character.

Mrs. Pomfret now seeing how far she had been imposed upon, resolved, for
the future, to be more upon her guard with Felix, and felt that she had
treated Franklin with great injustice, when she accused him of
malpractices about the sirloin of beef.

Good people, when they are made sensible that they have treated anyone
with injustice, are impatient to have an opportunity to rectify their
mistake; and Mrs. Pomfret was now prepared to see everything which
Franklin did in the most favourable point of view; especially as the next
day she discovered that it was he who every morning boiled the water for
her tea, and buttered her toast--services for which she had always
thought she was indebted to Felix.  Besides, she had rated Felix's
abilities very highly, because he made up her weekly accounts for her;
but unluckily once, when Franklin was out of the way, and she brought a
bill in a hurry to her favourite to cast up, she discovered that he did
not know how to cast up pounds, shillings and pence, and he was obliged
to confess that she must wait till Franklin came home.

But, passing over a number of small incidents which gradually unfolded
the character of the two boys, we must proceed to a more serious affair.

Corkscrew frequently, after he had finished taking away supper, and after
the housekeeper was gone to bed, sallied forth to a neighbouring alehouse
to drink with his friends.  The alehouse was kept by that cousin of
Felix's, who was so fond of "DELICATE cold turkey," and who had such
choice cherry-brandy.  Corkscrew kept the key of the house door, so that
he could return home whenever he thought proper; and, if he should by
accident be called for by his mistress after supper, Felix knew where to
find him, and did not scruple to make any of those excuses which poor
Franklin had too much integrity to use.

All these precautions taken, the butler was at liberty to indulge his
favourite passion, which so increased with indulgence, that his wages
were by no means sufficient to support him in this way of life.  Every
day he felt less resolution to break through his bad habits; for every
day drinking became more necessary to him.  His health was ruined.  With
a red, pimpled, bloated face, emaciated legs, and a swelled, diseased
body, he appeared the victim of intoxication.  In the morning, when he
got up, his hands trembled, his spirits flagged, he could do nothing
until he had taken a dram--an operation which he was obliged to repeat
several times in the course of the day, as all those wretched people MUST
who once acquire this habit.

He had run up a long bill at the alehouse which he frequented; and the
landlord, who grew urgent for his money, refused to give further credit.

One night, when Corkscrew had drunk enough only to make him fretful, he
leaned with his elbow surlily upon the table, began to quarrel with the
landlord, and swore that he had not of late treated him like a gentleman.
To which the landlord coolly replied, "That as long as he had paid like a
gentleman, he had been treated like one, and that was as much as anyone
could expect, or, at any rate, as much as anyone would meet with in this
world."  For the truth of this assertion he appealed, laughing, to a
party of men who were drinking in the room.  The men, however, took part
with Corkscrew, and, drawing him over to their table, made him sit down
with them.  They were in high good-humour, and the butler soon grew so
intimate with them, that, in the openness of his heart, he soon
communicated to them, not only all his own affairs, but all that he knew,
and more than all that he knew, of his mistress'.

His new friends were by no means uninterested by his conversation, and
encouraged him as much as possible to talk; for they had secret views,
which the butler was by no means sufficiently sober to discover.

Mrs. Churchill had some fine old family plate; and these men belonged to
a gang of housebreakers.  Before they parted with Corkscrew, they engaged
him to meet them again the next night; their intimacy was still more
closely cemented.  One of the men actually offered to lend Corkscrew
three guineas towards the payment of his debt, and hinted that, if he
thought proper, he could easily get the whole cleared off.  Upon this
hint, Corkscrew became all attention, till, after some hesitation on
their part, and repeated promises of secrecy on his, they at length
disclosed their plans to him.  They gave him to understand, that if he
would assist in letting them into his mistress' house, they would let him
have an ample share in the booty.  The butler, who had the reputation of
being an honest man, and indeed whose integrity had hitherto been proof
against everything but his mistress' port, turned pale, and trembled at
this proposal; drank two or three bumpers to drown thought; and promised
to give an answer the next day.

He went home more than half-intoxicated.  His mind was so full of what
had passed, that he could not help bragging to Felix, whom he found awake
at his return, that he could have his bill paid off at the alehouse
whenever he pleased; dropping, besides, some hints, which were not lost
upon Felix.

In the morning Felix reminded him of the things which he had said; and
Corkscrew, alarmed, endeavoured to evade his questions, by saying that he
was not in his senses when he talked in that manner.  Nothing, however,
that he could urge made any impression upon Felix, whose recollection on
the subject was perfectly distinct, and who had too much cunning himself,
and too little confidence in his companion, to be the dupe of his
dissimulation.  The butler knew not what to do when he saw that Felix was
absolutely determined either to betray their scheme, or to become a
sharer in the booty.

The next night came, and he was now to make a final decision; either to
determine on breaking off entirely with his new acquaintances, or taking
Felix with him to join in the plot.

His debt, his love of drinking, the impossibility of indulging it without
a fresh supply of money, all came into his mind at once, and conquered
his remaining scruples.  It is said by those whose fatal experience gives
them a right to be believed, that a drunkard will sacrifice anything,
everything, sooner than the pleasure of habitual intoxication.

How much easier is it never to begin a bad custom than to break through
it when once formed!

The hour of rendezvous came, and Corkscrew went to the alehouse, where he
found the housebreakers waiting for him, and a glass of brandy ready
poured out.  He sighed--drank--hesitated--drank again--heard the landlord
talk of his bill, saw the money produced which would pay it in a moment--
drank again--cursed himself, and, giving his hand to the villain who was
whispering in his ear, swore that he could not help it, and must do as
they would have him.  They required of him to give up the key of the
house door, that they might get another made by it.  He had left it with
Felix, and was now obliged to explain the new difficulty which had
arisen.  Felix knew enough to ruin them, and must therefore be won over.
This was no very difficult task; he had a strong desire to have some
worked cravats, and the butler knew enough of him to believe that this
would be a sufficient bribe.  The cravats were bought and shown to Felix.
He thought them the only things wanting to make him a complete, fine
gentleman; and to go without them, especially when he had once seen
himself in the glass with one tied on in a splendid bow, appeared
impossible.  Even this paltry temptation, working upon his vanity, at
length prevailed with a boy whose integrity had long been corrupted by
the habits of petty pilfering and daily falsehood.  It was agreed that,
the first time his mistress sent him out on a message, he should carry
the key of the house door to his cousin's, and deliver it into the hands
of one of the gang, who were there in waiting for it.  Such was the
scheme.

Felix, the night after all this had been planned, went to bed, and fell
fast asleep; but the butler, who had not yet stifled the voice of
conscience, felt, in the silence of the night, so insupportably
miserable, that, instead of going to rest, he stole softly into the
pantry for a bottle of his mistress' wine, and there drinking glass after
glass, he stayed till he became so far intoxicated, that, though he
contrived to find his way back to bed, he could by no means undress
himself.  Without any power of recollection, he flung himself upon the
bed, leaving his candle half hanging out of the candlestick beside him.
Franklin slept in the next room to him, and presently awaking, thought he
perceived a strong smell of something burning.  He jumped up, and seeing
a light under the butler's door, gently opened it, and to his
astonishment, beheld one of the bed curtains in flames.  He immediately
ran to the butler, and pulled him with all his force, to rouse him from
his lethargy.  He came to his senses at length, but was so terrified, and
so helpless, that, if it had not been for Franklin, the whole house would
soon inevitably have been on fire.  Felix, trembling and cowardly, knew
not what to do; and it was curious to see him obeying Franklin, whose
turn it now was to command.  Franklin ran upstairs to awaken Mrs.
Pomfret, whose terror of fire was so great that she came from her room
almost out of her senses, whilst he, with the greatest presence of mind,
recollected where he had seen two large tubs of water, which the maids
had prepared the night before for their washing, and seizing the wet
linen which had been left to soak, he threw them upon the flames.  He
exerted himself with so much good sense, that the fire was presently
extinguished.

Everything was now once more safe and quiet.  Mrs. Pomfret, recovering
from her fright, postponed all inquiries till the morning, and rejoiced
that her mistress had not been awakened, whilst Corkscrew flattered
himself that he should be able to conceal the true cause of the accident.

"Don't you tell Mrs. Pomfret where you found the candle when you came
into the room," said he to Franklin.

"If she asks me, you know I must tell the truth," replied he.

"Must!" repeated Felix, sneeringly; "what, you MUST be a tell-tale!"

"No, I never told any tales of anybody, and I should be very sorry to get
anyone into a scrape; but for all that I shall not tell a lie, either for
myself or anybody else, let you call me what names you will."

"But if I were to give you something that you would like," said
Corkscrew--"something that I know you would like!" repeated Felix.

"Nothing you can give me will do," answered Franklin, steadily, "so it is
useless to say any more about it--I hope I shall not be questioned."

In this hope he was mistaken; for the first thing Mrs. Pomfret did in the
morning was to come into the room to examine and deplore the burnt
curtains, whilst Corkscrew stood by, endeavouring to exculpate himself by
all the excuses he could invent.

Mrs. Pomfret, however, though sometimes blinded by her prejudices, was no
fool; and it was absolutely impossible to make her believe that a candle,
which had been left on the hearth, where Corkscrew protested he had left
it, could have set curtains on fire which were at least six feet distant.
Turning short round to Franklin, she desired that he would show her where
he found the candle when he came into the room.  He took up the
candlestick; but the moment the housekeeper cast her eye upon it, she
snatched it from his hands; "How did this candlestick come here?  This
was not the candlestick you found here last night," cried she.  "Yes,
indeed it was," answered Franklin.  "That is impossible," retorted she,
vehemently, "for I left this candlestick with my own hands last night, in
the hall, the last thing I did, after you," said she, turning to the
butler, "was gone to bed--I'm sure of it--Nay, don't you recollect my
taking this JAPANNED CANDLESTICK out of your hand, and making you to go
up to bed with the brass one, and I bolted the door at the stair-head
after you?"

This was all very true; but Corkscrew had afterwards gone down from his
room by a back staircase, unbolted that door, and, upon his return from
the alehouse, had taken the japanned candlestick by mistake upstairs, and
had left the brass one in its stead upon the hall table.

"Oh, ma'am," said Felix, "indeed you forget; for Mr. Corkscrew came into
my room to desire me to call him betimes in the morning, and I happened
to take particular notice, and he had the japanned candlestick in his
hand, and that was just as I heard you, bolting the door. Indeed, ma'am
you forget."

"Indeed, sir," retorted Mrs. Pomfret, rising in anger, "I do not forget;
I'm not come to be SUPPERANNUATED yet, I hope.  How do you dare to tell
me I forget?"

"Oh, ma'am," cried Felix, "I beg your pardon, I did not--I did not mean
to say you forgot, but only I thought, perhaps, you might not
particularly remember; for if you please to recollect--"

"I won't please to recollect just whatever you please, sir!  Hold your
tongue; why should you poke yourself into this scrape; what have you to
do with it, I should be glad to know?"

"Nothing in the world, oh nothing in the world; I'm sure I beg your
pardon, ma'am," answered Felix, in a soft tone; and, sneaking off, left
his friend Corkscrew to fight his own battle, secretly resolving to
desert in good time, if he saw any danger of the alehouse transactions
coming to light.

Corkscrew could make but very blundering excuses for himself and,
conscious of guilt, he turned pale, and appeared so much more terrified
than butlers usually appear when detected in a lie, that Mrs. Pomfret
resolved, as she said, to sift the matter to the bottom.  Impatiently did
she wait till the clock struck nine, and her mistress' bell rang, the
signal for her attendance at her levee.

"How do you find yourself this morning, ma'am?" said she, undrawing the
curtains.

"Very sleepy, indeed," answered her mistress in a drowsy voice; "I think
I must sleep half an hour longer--shut the curtains."

"As you please, ma'am; but I suppose I had better open a little of the
window shutter, for it's past nine."

"But just struck."

"Oh dear, ma'am, it struck before I came upstairs, and you know we are
twenty minutes slow--Lord bless us!" exclaimed Mrs. Pomfret, as she let
fall the bar of the window, which roused her mistress.  "I'm sure I beg
your pardon a thousand times--it's only the bar--because I had this great
key in my hand."

"Put down the key, then, or you'll knock something else down; and you may
open the shutters now; for I'm quite awake."

"Dear me! I'm so sorry to think of disturbing you," cried Mrs. Pomfret,
at the same time throwing the shutters wide open; "but, to be sure,
ma'am, I have something to tell you, which won't let you sleep again in a
hurry.  I brought up this here key of the house door for reasons of my
own, which I'm sure you'll approve of; but I'm not come to that part of
my story yet.  I hope you were not disturbed by the noise in the house
last night, ma'am."

"I heard no noise."

"I am surprised at that, though," continued Mrs. Pomfret, and proceeded
to give a most ample account of the fire, of her fears, and her
suspicions.  "To be sure, ma'am, what I say IS, that, without the spirit
of prophecy, one can nowadays account for what has passed.  I'm quite
clear in my own judgment, that Mr. Corkscrew must have been out last
night after I went to bed; for, besides the japanned candlestick, which
of itself I'm sure is strong enough to hang a man, there's another
circumstance, ma'am, that certifies it to me--though I have not mentioned
it, ma'am, to no one yet," lowering her voice--"Franklin, when I
questioned him, told me, that he left the lantern in the outside porch in
the court last night, and this morning it was on the kitchen table.  Now,
ma'am, that lantern could not come without hands; and I could not forget
about that, you know; for Franklin says, he's sure he left the lantern
out."

"And do you believe HIM?" inquired her mistress.

"To be sure, ma'am--how can I help believing him?  I never found him out
in the least symptom of a lie since ever he came into the house; so one
can't help believing in him, like him or not."

"Without meaning to tell a falsehood, however," said the lady, "he might
make a mistake."

"No, ma'am, he never makes mistakes; it is not his way to go gossiping
and tattling; he never tells anything till he's asked, and then it's fit
he should.  About the sirloin of beef, and all, he was right in the end,
I found, to do him justice; and I'm sure he's right now about the
lantern--he's ALWAY'S RIGHT"

Mrs. Churchill could not help smiling.

"If you had seen him, ma'am, last night in the midst of the fire--I'm
sure we may thank him that we were not burned alive in our beds--and I
shall never forget his coming to call me.  Poor fellow! he that I was
always scolding and scolding, enough to make him hate me.  But he's too
good to hate anybody; and I'll be bound I'll make it up to him now."

"Take care that you don't go from one extreme into another, Pomfret;
don't spoil the boy."

"No, ma'am, there's no danger of that; but I'm sure if you had seen him
last night yourself, you would think he deserved to be rewarded."

"And so he shall be rewarded," said Mrs. Churchill; "but I will try him
more fully yet."

"There's no occasion, I think, for trying him any more, ma'am," said Mrs.
Pomfret, who was as violent in her likings as in her dislikes.

"Pray desire," continued her mistress, "that he will bring up breakfast
this morning; and leave the key of the house-door, Pomfret, with me."

When Franklin brought the urn into the breakfast-parlour, his mistress
was standing by the fire with the key in her hand.  She spoke to him of
his last night's exertions in terms of much approbation.  "How long have
you lived with me?" said she, pausing; "three weeks, I think?"

"Three weeks and four days, madam."

"That is but a short time; yet you have conducted yourself so as to make
me think I may depend upon you.  You know this key?"

"I believe, madam, it is the key of the house-door."

"It is; I shall trust it in your care.  It is a great trust for so young
a person as you are."  Franklin stood silent, with a firm but modest
look.  "If you take the charge of this key," continued his mistress,
"remember it is upon condition that you never give it out of your own
hands.  In the daytime it must not be left in the door.  You must not
tell anybody where you keep it at night; and the house-door must not be
unlocked after eleven o'clock at night, unless by my orders.  Will you
take charge of the key upon these conditions?"

"I will, madam, do anything you order me," said Franklin, and received
the key from her hands.

When Mrs. Churchill's orders were made known, they caused many secret
marvellings and murmurings.  Corkscrew and Felix were disconcerted, and
dared not openly avow their discontent; and they treated Franklin with
the greatest seeming kindness and cordiality.

Everything went on smoothly for three days.  The butler never attempted
his usual midnight visits to the alehouse, but went to bed in proper
time, and paid particular court to Mrs Pomfret, in order to dispel her
suspicions.  She had never had any idea of the real fact, that he and
Felix were joined in a plot with house-breakers to rob the house, but
thought he only went out at irregular hours to indulge himself in his
passion for drinking.

Thus stood affairs the night before Mrs. Churchill's birthday.
Corkscrew, by the housekeeper's means, ventured to present a petition
that he might go to the play the next day, and his request was granted.
Franklin came into the kitchen just when all the servants had gathered
round the butler, who, with great importance, was reading aloud the play-
bill.  Everybody present soon began to speak at once, and with great
enthusiasm talked of the playhouse, the actors, and actresses; and then
Felix, in the first pause, turned to Franklin, and said, "Lord, you know
nothing of all this! YOU never went to a play, did you?"

"Never," said Franklin, and felt, he did not know why, a little ashamed;
and he longed extremely to go to one.

"How should you like to go to the play with me to-morrow?" said
Corkscrew.

"Oh," exclaimed Franklin, "I should like it exceedingly."

"And do you think mistress would let you if I asked?"

"I think maybe she would, if Mrs. Pomfret asked her."

"But then you have no money, have you?"

"No," said Franklin, sighing.

"But stay," said Corkscrew, "what I am thinking of is, that if mistress
will let you go, I'll treat you myself, rather than that you should he
disappointed."

Delight, surprise and gratitude appeared in Franklin's face at these
words.  Corkscrew rejoiced to see that now, at least, he had found a most
powerful temptation.  "Well then, I'll go just now and ask her.  In the
meantime, lend me the key of the house door for a minute or two."

"The key!" answered Franklin, starting; "I'm sorry, but I can't do that,
for I've promised my mistress never to let it out of my own hands."

"But how will she know anything of the matter?  Run, run, and get it for
us."

"No, I CANNOT," replied Franklin, resisting the push which the butler
gave his shoulder.

"You can't?" cried Corkscrew, changing his tone; "then, sir, I can't take
you to the play."

"Very well, sir," said Franklin, sorrowfully, but with steadiness.

"Very well, sir," said Felix, mimicking him, "you need not look so
important, nor fancy yourself such a great man, because you're master of
a key."

"Say no more to him," interrupted Corkscrew:  "let him alone to take his
own way.  Felix, you would have no objection, I suppose, to going to the
play with me?"

"Oh, I should like it of all things, if I did not come between anybody
else.  But come, come!" added the hypocrite, assuming a tone of friendly
persuasion, "you won't be such a blockhead, Franklin, as to lose going to
the play for nothing; it's only just obstinacy.  What harm can it do, to
lend Mr. Corkscrew the key for five minutes? he'll give it to you back
again safe and sound."

"I don't doubt THAT," answered Franklin.

"Then it must be all because you don't wish to oblige Mr. Corkscrew."

"No, but I can't oblige him in this; for, as I told you before, my
mistress trusted me.  I promised never to let the key out of my own
hands, and you would not have me break my trust.  Mr. Spencer told me
that was worse than ROBBING."

At the word ROBBING both Corkscrew and Felix involuntarily cast down
their eyes, and turned the conversation immediately, saying, that he did
very right; that they did not really want the key, and had only asked for
it just to try if he would keep his word.  "Shake hands," said Corkscrew,
"I am glad to find you out to be an honest fellow!"

"I am sorry you did not think me an honest fellow before, Mr. Corkscrew,"
said Franklin, giving his hand rather proudly, and he walked away.

"We shall make no hand of this prig," said Corkscrew.

"But we'll have the key from him in spite of all his obstinacy," said
Felix; "and let him make his story good as he can afterwards.  He shall
repent of these airs.  To-night I'll watch him, and find out where he
hides the key; and when he's asleep we'll get it without thanking him."

This plan Felix put into execution.  They discovered the place where
Franklin kept the key at night, stole it whilst he slept, took off the
impression in wax, and carefully replaced it in Franklin's trunk, exactly
where they found it.

Probably our young readers cannot guess what use they could mean to make
of this impression of the key in wax.  Knowing how to do mischief is very
different from wishing to do it:  and the most innocent persons are
generally the least ignorant.  By means of the impression, which they had
thus obtained, Corkscrew and Felix proposed to get a false key made by
Picklock, a smith who belonged to their gang of house-breakers; and with
this false key knew they could open the door whenever they pleased.

Little suspecting what had happened, Franklin, the next morning went to
unlock the house door, as usual; but finding the key entangled in the
lock, he took it out to examine it, and perceived a lump of wax sticking
in one of the wards.  Struck with this circumstance, it brought to his
mind all that had passed the preceding evening, and being sure that he
had no wax near the key, he began to suspect what had happened; and he
could not help recollecting what he had once heard Felix say, that "give
him but a halfpenny worth of wax, and he could open the strongest lock
that ever was made by hands."

All these things considered, Franklin resolved to take the key just as it
was, with the wax sticking to it, to his mistress.

"I was not mistaken when I thought I might trust YOU with this key," said
Mrs. Churchill, after she had heard his story.  "My brother will be here
to-day, and I shall consult him.  In the meantime, say nothing of what
has passed."

Evening came, and after tea Mr. Spencer sent for Franklin upstairs.  "So,
Mr. Franklin," said he, "I'm glad to find you are in such high TRUST in
this family."  Franklin bowed.  "But you have lost, I understand, the
pleasure of going to the play to-night."

"I don't think anything--much, I mean, of that, sir," answered Franklin,
smiling.

"Are Corkscrew and Felix GONE to the play?"

"Yes; half an hour ago, sir."

"Then I shall look into his room, and examine the pantry and the plate
that is under his care."

When Mr. Spencer came to examine the pantry, he found the large salvers
and cups in a basket behind the door, and the other things placed so as
to be easily carried off.  Nothing at first appeared in Corkscrew's
bedchamber, to strengthen their suspicions, till, just as they were going
to leave the room, Mrs. Pomfret exclaimed, "Why, if there is not Mr.
Corkscrew's dress coat hanging up there! and if here isn't Felix's fine
cravat that he wanted in such a hurry to go to the play!  Why, sir, they
can't be gone to the play.  Look at the cravat.  Ah! upon my word I am
afraid they are not at the play.  No, sir, you may be sure that they are
plotting with their barbarous gang at the alehouse; and they'll certainly
break into the house to-night.  We shall all be murdered in our beds, as
sure as I'm a living woman, sir; but if you'll only take my advice--"

"Pray, good Mrs. Pomfret," Mr. Spencer observed, "don't be alarmed."

"Nay, sir, but I won't pretend to sleep in the house, if Franklin isn't
to have a blunderbuss, and I a BAGGONET."

"You shall have both, indeed, Mrs. Pomfret; but don't make such a noise,
for everybody will hear you."

The love of mystery was the only thing which could have conquered Mrs.
Pomfret's love of talking.  She was silent, and contented herself the
rest of the evening with making signs, looking ominous, and stalking
about the house like one possessed with a secret.

Escaped from Mrs. Pomfret's fears and advice, Mr. Spencer went to a shop
within a few doors of the alehouse, which he heard Corkscrew frequented,
and sent to beg to speak to the landlord.  He came; and, when Mr. Spencer
questioned him, confessed that Corkscrew and Felix were actually drinking
in his house with two men of suspicious appearance; that, as he passed
through the passage, he heard them disputing about a key; and that one of
them said, "Since we've got the key, we'll go about it to-night."  This
was sufficient information.  Mr. Spencer, lest the landlord should give
them information of what was going forwards, took him along with him to
Bow Street.

A constable and proper assistance was sent to Mrs. Churchill's.  They
stationed themselves in a back parlour which opened on a passage leading
to the butler's pantry, where the plate was kept.  A little after
midnight they heard the hall door open.  Corkscrew and his accomplices
went directly to the pantry; and there Mr. Spencer and the constable
immediately secured them, as they were carrying off their booty.

Mrs Churchill and Pomfret had spent the night at the house of an
acquaintance in the same street.  "Well, ma'am," said Mrs. Pomfret, who
had heard all the news in the morning, "the villains are all safe, thank
God.  I was afraid to go to the window this morning; but it was my luck
to see them all go by to gaol.  They looked so shocking!  I am sure I
never shall forget Felix's look to my dying day!  But poor Franklin!
ma'am; that boy has the best heart in the world.  I could not get him to
give a second look at them as they passed.  Poor fellow! I thought he
would have dropped; and he was so modest, ma'am, when Mr. Spencer spoke
to him, and told him he had done his duty."

"And did my brother tell him what reward I intend for him?"

"No, ma'am, and I'm sure Franklin thinks no more of REWARD than I do."

"I intend," continued Mrs. Churchill, "to sell some of my old useless
plate, and to lay it out in an annuity for Franklin's life."

"La, ma'am!" exclaimed Mrs. Pomfret, with unfeigned joy, "I'm sure you
are very good; and I'm very glad of it."

"And," continued Mrs. Churchill, "here are some tickets for the play,
which I shall beg you, Pomfret, to give him, and to take him with you."

"I am very much obliged to you, indeed, ma'am; and I'll go with him with
all my heart, and choose such plays as won't do no prejudice to his
morality.  And, ma'am," continued Mrs. Pomfret, "the night after the fire
I left him my great Bible and my watch, in my will; for I never was more
mistaken at the first in any boy in my born days; but he has won me by
his own DESERTS, and I shall from this time forth love all the
VILLAINTROPIC folks for his sake."



SIMPLE SUSAN.



CHAPTER I.

     Waked as her custom was, before the day,
     To do the observance due to sprightly May.
                                          Dryden.

In a retired hamlet on the borders of Wales, between Oswestry and
Shrewsbury, it is still the custom to celebrate the 1st of May.

The children of the village, who look forward to this rural festival with
joyful eagerness, usually meet on the last day of April to make up their
nosegays for the morning and to choose their queen.  Their customary
place of meeting is at a hawthorn, which stands in a little green nook,
open on one side to a shady lane, and separated on the other side by a
thick sweet-brier and hawthorn hedge from the garden of an attorney.

This attorney began the world with nothing, but he contrived to scrape
together a good deal of money, everybody knew how.  He built a new house
at the entrance of the village, and had a large, well fenced garden, yet,
notwithstanding his fences, he never felt himself secure.  Such were his
litigious habits, and his suspicious temper, that he was constantly at
variance with his simple and peaceable neighbours.  Some pig, or dog, or
goat, or goose was for ever trespassing.  His complaints and his
extortions wearied and alarmed the whole hamlet.  The paths in his fields
were at length unfrequented, his stiles were blocked up with stones or
stuffed with brambles and briers, so that not a gosling could creep
under, or a giant get over them.  Indeed, so careful were even the
village children of giving offence to this irritable man of the law, that
they would not venture to fly a kite near his fields lest it should
entangle in his trees, or fall upon his meadow.

Mr. Case, for this was the name of our attorney, had a son and a
daughter, to whose education he had not time to attend, as his whole soul
was intent upon accumulating for them a fortune.  For several years he
suffered his children to run wild in the village; but suddenly, on his
being appointed to a considerable agency, he began to think of making his
children a little genteel.  He sent his son to learn Latin; he hired a
maid to wait upon his daughter Barbara; and he strictly forbade her
thenceforward to keep company with any of the poor children, who had
hitherto been her playfellows.  They were not sorry for this prohibition,
because she had been their tyrant rather than their companion.  She was
vexed to observe that her absence was not regretted, and she was
mortified to perceive that she could not humble them by any display of
airs and finery.

There was one poor girl, amongst her former associates, to whom she had a
peculiar dislike,--Susan Price, a sweet tempered, modest, sprightly,
industrious lass, who was the pride and delight of the village.  Her
father rented a small farm, and, unfortunately for him, he lived near
Attorney Case.

Barbara used often to sit at her window, watching Susan at work.
Sometimes she saw her in the neat garden raking the beds, or weeding the
borders; sometimes she was kneeling at her beehive with fresh flowers for
her bees; sometimes she was in the poultry yard, scattering corn from her
sieve amongst the eager chickens; and in the evening she was often seated
in a little honeysuckle arbour, with a clean, light, three-legged deal
table before her, upon which she put her plain work.

Susan had been taught to work neatly by her good mother, who was very
fond of her, and to whom she was most gratefully attached.

Mrs. Price was an intelligent, active, domestic woman; but her health was
not robust.  She earned money, however, by taking in plain work; and she
was famous for baking excellent bread and breakfast cakes.  She was
respected in the village, for her conduct as a wife and as a mother, and
all were eager to show her attention.  At her door the first branch of
hawthorn was always placed on May morning, and her Susan was usually
Queen of the May.

It was now time to choose the Queen.  The setting sun shone full upon the
pink blossoms of the hawthorn, when the merry group assembled upon their
little green.  Barbara was now walking in sullen state in her father's
garden.  She heard the busy voices in the lane, and she concealed herself
behind the high hedge, that she might listen to their conversation.

"Where's Susan?" were the first unwelcome words which she overheard.
"Ay, where's Susan?" repeated Philip, stopping short in the middle of a
new tune that he was playing on his pipe.  "I wish Susan would come!  I
want her to sing me this same tune over again; I have not it yet."

"And I wish Susan would come, I'm sure," cried a little girl, whose lap
was full of primroses.  "Susan will give me some thread to tie up my
nosegays, and she'll show me where the fresh violets grow; and she has
promised to give me a great bunch of her double cowslips to wear to-
morrow.  I wish she would come."

"Nothing can be done without Susan!  She always shows us where the nicest
flowers are to be found in the lanes and meadows," said they.  "She must
make up the garlands; and she shall be Queen of the May!" exclaimed a
multitude of little voices.

"But she does not come!" said Philip.

Rose, who was her particular friend, now came forward to assure the
impatient assembly, "that she would answer for it Susan would come as
soon as she possibly could, and that she probably was detained by
business at home."

The little electors thought that all business should give way to theirs,
and Rose was dispatched to summon her friend immediately.

