"Tell her to make haste," cried Philip.  "Attorney Case dined at the
Abbey to-day--luckily for us.  If he comes home and finds us here, maybe
he'll drive us away; for he says this bit of ground belongs to his
garden:  though that is not true, I'm sure; for Farmer Price knows, and
says, it was always open to the road.  The Attorney wants to get our
playground, so he does.  I wish he and his daughter Bab, or Miss Barbara,
as she must now be called, were a hundred miles off, out of our way, I
know.  No later than yesterday she threw down my nine-pins in one of her
ill-humours, as she was walking by with her gown all trailing in the
dust."

"Yes," cried Mary, the little primrose-girl, "her gown is always
trailing.  She does not hold it up nicely, like Susan; and with all her
fine clothes she never looks half so neat.  Mamma says she wishes I may
be like Susan, when I grow up to be a great girl, and so do I.  I should
not like to look conceited as Barbara does, if I was ever so rich."

"Rich or poor," said Philip, "it does not become a girl to look
conceited, much less BOLD, as Barbara did the other day, when she was at
her father's door without a hat upon her head, staring at the strange
gentleman who stopped hereabout to let his horse drink.  I know what he
thought of Bab by his looks, and of Susan, too; for Susan was in her
garden, bending down a branch of the laburnum-tree, looking at its yellow
flowers, which were just come out; and when the gentleman asked her how
many miles it was from Shrewsbury, she answered him so modest!--not
bashful, like as if she had never seen nobody before--but just right; and
then she pulled on her straw hat, which was fallen back with her looking
up at the laburnum, and she went her ways home; and the gentleman says to
me, after she was gone, 'Pray, who is that neat, modest girl--?'  But I
wish Susan would come," cried Philip, interrupting himself,

Susan was all this time, as her friend Rose rightly guessed, busy at
home.  She was detained by her father's returning later than usual.  His
supper was ready for him nearly an hour before he came home; and Susan
swept up the ashes twice, and twice put on wood to make a cheerful blaze
for him; but at last, when he did come in, he took no notice of the blaze
or of Susan; and when his wife asked him how he did, he made no answer,
but stood with his back to the fire, looking very gloomy.  Susan put his
supper upon the table, and set his own chair for him; but he pushed away
the chair and turned from the table, saying--"I shall eat nothing, child!
Why have you such a fire to roast me at this time of the year?"

"You said yesterday, father, I thought, that you liked a little cheerful
wood fire in the evening; and there was a great shower of hail; your coat
is quite wet, we must dry it."

"Take it, then, child," said he, pulling it off--"I shall soon have no
coat to dry--and take my hat, too," said he, throwing it upon the ground.

Susan hung up his hat, put his coat over the back of a chair to dry, and
then stood anxiously looking at her mother, who was not well; she had
this day fatigued herself with baking; and now, alarmed by her husband's
moody behaviour, she sat down pale and trembling.  He threw himself into
a chair, folded his arms, and fixed his eyes upon the fire.

Susan was the first who ventured to break silence.  Happy the father who
has such a daughter as Susan!--her unaltered sweetness of temper, and her
playful, affectionate caresses, at last somewhat dissipated her father's
melancholy.

He could not be prevailed upon to eat any of the supper which had been
prepared for him; however, with a faint smile, he told Susan that he
thought he could eat one of her guinea-hen's eggs.  She thanked him, and
with that nimble alacrity which marks the desire to please, she ran to
her neat chicken-yard; but, alas!, her guinea-hen was not there--it had
strayed into the attorney's garden.  She saw it through the paling, and
timidly opening the little gate, she asked Miss Barbara, who was walking
slowly by, to let her come in and take her guinea-hen.  Barbara, who was
at this instant reflecting, with no agreeable feelings, upon the
conversation of the village children, to which she had recently listened,
started when she heard Susan's voice, and with a proud, ill-humoured look
and voice, refused her request.

"Shut the gate," said Barbara, "you have no business in our garden; and
as for your hen, I shall keep it; it is always flying in here, and
plaguing us, and my father says it is a trespasser; and he told me I
might catch it and keep it the next time it got in, and it is in now."
Then Barbara called to her maid, Betty, and bid her catch the mischievous
hen.

"Oh, my guinea-hen! my pretty guinea-hen!" cried Susan, as they hunted
the frightened, screaming creature from corner to corner.

"Here we have got it!" said Betty, holding it fast by the legs.

"Now pay damages, Queen Susan, or good-bye to your pretty guinea-hen,"
said Barbara, in an insulting tone.

"Damages! what damages?" said Susan; "tell me what I must pay."

"A shilling," said Barbara.

"Oh, if sixpence would do!" said Susan; "I have but sixpence of my own in
the world, and here it is."

"It won't do," said Barbara, turning her back.

"Nay, but hear me," cried Susan; "let me at least come in to look for its
eggs.  I only want ONE for my father's supper; you shall have all the
rest."

"What's your father, or his supper to us? is he so nice that he can eat
none but guinea-hen's eggs?" said Barbara.  "If you want your hen and
your eggs, pay for them, and you'll have them."

"I have but sixpence, and you say that won't do," said Susan with a sigh,
as she looked at her favourite, which was in the maid's grasping hands,
struggling and screaming in vain.

Susan retired disconsolate.  At the door of her father's cottage she saw
her friend Rose, who was just come to summon her to the hawthorn bush.

"They are all at the hawthorn, and I am come for you.  We can do nothing
without YOU, dear Susan," cried Rose, running to meet her, at the moment
she saw her.  "You are chosen Queen of the May--come, make haste.  But
what is the matter? why do you look so sad?"

"Ah!" said Susan, "don't wait for me; I can't come to you, but," added
she, pointing to the tuft of double cowslips in the garden, "gather those
for poor little Mary; I promised them to her, and tell her the violets
are under a hedge just opposite the turnstile, on the right as we go to
church.  Good-bye! never mind me; I can't come--I can't stay, for my
father wants me."

"But don't turn away your face; I won't keep you a moment; only tell me
what's the matter," said her friend, following her into the cottage.

"Oh, nothing, not much," said Susan; "only that I wanted the egg in a
great hurry for father, it would not have vexed me--to be sure I should
have clipped my guinea-hen's wings, and then she could not have flown
over the hedge; but let us think no more about it, now," added she,
twinkling away a tear.

When Rose, however, learnt that her friend's guinea-hen was detained
prisoner by the attorney's daughter, she exclaimed, with all the honest
warmth of indignation, and instantly ran back to tell the story to her
companions.

"Barbara! ay; like father, like daughter," cried Farmer Price, starting
from the thoughtful attitude in which he had been fixed, and drawing his
chair closer to his wife.

"You see something is amiss with me, wife--I'll tell you what it is."  As
he lowered his voice, Susan, who was not sure that he wished she should
hear what he was going to say, retired from behind his chair.  "Susan,
don't go; sit you down here, my sweet Susan," said he, making room for
her upon his chair; "I believe I was a little cross when I came in first
tonight; but I had something to vex me, as you shall hear.

"About a fortnight ago, you know, wife," continued he, "there was a
balloting in our town for the militia; now at that time I wanted but ten
days of forty years of age; and the attorney told me I was a fool for not
calling myself plump forty.  But the truth is the truth, and it is what I
think fittest to be spoken at all times come what will of it.  So I was
drawn for a militiaman; but when I thought how loth you and I would be to
part, I was main glad to hear that I could get off by paying eight or
nine guineas for a substitute--only I had not the nine guineas--for, you
know, we had bad luck with our sheep this year, and they died away one
after another--but that was no excuse, so I went to Attorney Case, and,
with a power of difficulty, I got him to lend me the money; for which, to
be sure, I gave him something, and left my lease of our farm with him, as
he insisted upon it, by way of security for the loan.  Attorney Case is
too many for me.  He has found what he calls a flaw in my lease; and the
lease, he tells me, is not worth a farthing, and that he can turn us all
out of our farm to-morrow if he pleases; and sure enough he will please,
for I have thwarted him this day, and he swears he'll be revenged of me.
Indeed, he has begun with me badly enough already.  I'm not come to the
worst part of my story yet--"

Here Farmer Price made a dead stop; and his wife and Susan looked up in
his face, breathless with anxiety.

"It must come out," said he, with a short sigh; "I must leave you in
three days, wife."

"Must you?" said his wife, in a faint, resigned voice.  "Susan, love,
open the window."  Susan ran to open the window, and then returned to
support her mother's head.  When she came a little to herself she sat up,
begged that her husband would go on, and that nothing might be concealed
from her.  Her husband had no wish indeed to conceal anything from a wife
he loved so well; but, firm as he was, and steady to his maxim, that the
truth was the thing the fittest to be spoken at all times, his voice
faltered, and it was with great difficulty that he brought himself to
speak the whole truth at this moment.

The fact was this.  Case met Farmer Price as he was coming home,
whistling, from a new ploughed field.  The attorney had just dined at The
Abbey.  The Abbey was the family seat of an opulent baronet in the
neighbourhood, to whom Mr. Case had been agent.  The baronet died
suddenly, and his estate and title devolved to a younger brother, who was
now just arrived in the country, and to whom Mr. Case was eager to pay
his court, in hopes of obtaining his favour.  Of the agency he flattered
himself that he was pretty secure; and he thought that he might assume
the tone of command towards the tenants, especially towards one who was
some guineas in debt, and in whose lease there was a flaw.

Accosting the farmer in a haughty manner, the attorney began with, "So,
Farmer Price, a word with you, if you please.  Walk on here, man, beside
my horse, and you'll hear me.  You have changed your opinion, I hope,
about that bit of land--that corner at the end of my garden?"

"As how, Mr. Case?" said the farmer.

"As how, man!  Why, you said something about its not belonging to me,
when you heard me talk of inclosing it the other day."

"So I did," said Price, "and so I do."

Provoked and astonished at the firm tone in which these words were
pronounced, the attorney was upon the point of swearing that he would
have his revenge; but, as his passions were habitually attentive to the
LETTER of the law, he refrained from any hasty expression, which might,
he was aware, in a court of justice, be hereafter brought against him.

"My good friend, Mr. Price," said he, in a soft voice, and pale with
suppressed rage.  He forced a smile.  "I'm under the necessity of calling
in the money I lent you some time ago, and you will please to take
notice, that it must be paid to-morrow morning.  I wish you a good
evening.  You have the money ready for me, I daresay."

"No," said the farmer, "not a guinea of it; but John Simpson, who was my
substitute, has not left our village yet.  I'll get the money back from
him, and go myself, if so be it must be so, into the militia--so I will."

The attorney did not expect such a determination, and he represented, in
a friendly, hypocritical tone to Price, that he had no wish to drive him
to such an extremity; that it would be the height of folly in him TO RUN
HIS HEAD AGAINST A WALL FOR NO PURPOSE.  "You don't mean to take the
corner into your own garden, do you, Price?" said he.

"I?" said the farmer, "God forbid! it's none of mine, I never take what
does not belong to me."

"True, right, very proper, of course," said Mr. Case; "but then you have
no interest in life in the land in question?"

"None."

"Then why so stiff about it, Price?  All I want of you to say--"

"To say that black is white, which I won't do, Mr. Case.  The ground is a
thing not worth talking of; but it's neither yours nor mine.  In my
memory, since the NEW lane was made, it has always been open to the
parish; and no man shall inclose it with my good-will.  Truth is truth,
and must be spoken; justice is justice, and should be done, Mr.
Attorney."

"And law is law, Mr. Farmer, and shall have its course, to your cost,"
cried the attorney, exasperated by the dauntless spirit of this village
Hampden.

Here they parted.  The glow of enthusiasm, the pride of virtue, which
made our hero brave, could not render him insensible.  As he drew nearer
home, many melancholy thoughts pressed upon his heart.  He passed the
door of his own cottage with resolute steps, however, and went through
the village in search of the man who had engaged to be his substitute.
He found him, told him how the matter stood; and luckily the man, who had
not yet spent the money, was willing to return it; as there were many
others drawn for the militia, who, he observed, would be glad to give him
the same price, or more, for his services.

The moment Price got the money, he hastened to Mr. Case's house, walked
straight forward into his room, and laying the money down upon his desk,
"There, Mr. Attorney, are your nine guineas; count them; now I have done
with you."

"Not yet," said the attorney, jingling the money triumphantly in his
hand.  "We'll give you a taste of the law, my good sir, or I'm mistaken.
You forgot the flaw in your lease, which I have safe in this desk."

"Ah, my lease," said the farmer, who had almost forgot to ask for it till
he was thus put in mind of it by the attorney's imprudent threat.  "Give
me my lease, Mr. Case.  I've paid my money; you have no right to keep the
lease any longer, whether it is a bad one or a good one."

"Pardon me," said the attorney, locking his desk, and putting the key
into his pocket, "possession, my honest friend," cried he, striking his
hand upon the desk, "is nine points of the law.  Good night to you.  I
cannot in conscience return a lease to a tenant in which I know there is
a capital flaw.  It is my duty to show it to my employer; or, in other
words, to your new landlord, whose agent I have good reasons to expect I
shall be; you will live to repent your obstinacy, Mr. Price.  Your
servant, sir."

Price retired with melancholy feelings, but not intimidated.  Many a man
returns home with a gloomy countenance, who has not quite so much cause
for vexation.

When Susan heard her father's story, she quite forgot her guinea-hen, and
her whole soul was intent upon her poor mother, who, notwithstanding her
utmost exertion, could not support herself under this sudden stroke of
misfortune.

In the middle of the night Susan was called up; her mother's fever ran
high for some hours; but towards morning it abated, and she fell into a
soft sleep with Susan's hand locked fast in hers.

Susan sat motionless, and breathed softly, lest she should disturb her.
The rushlight, which stood beside the bed, was now burnt low; the long
shadow of the tall wicker chair flitted, faded, appeared, and vanished,
as the flame rose and sunk in the socket.  Susan was afraid that the
disagreeable smell might waken her mother; and, gently disengaging her
hand, she went on tiptoe to extinguish the candle.  All was silent:  the
grey light of the morning was now spreading over every object; the sun
rose slowly, and Susan stood at the lattice window, looking through the
small leaded, cross-barred panes at the splendid spectacle.  A few birds
began to chirp; but, as Susan was listening to them, her mother started
in her sleep, and spoke unintelligibly.  Susan hung up a white apron
before the window to keep out the light, and just then she heard the
sound of music at a distance in the village.  As it approached nearer,
she knew that it was Philip playing upon his pipe and tabor.  She
distinguished the merry voices of her companions "carolling in honour of
the May," and soon she saw them coming towards her father's cottage, with
branches and garlands in their hands.  She opened quick, but gently, the
latch of the door, and ran out to meet them.

"Here she is!--here's Susan!" they exclaimed, joyfully.  "Here's the
Queen of the May."  "And here's her crown!" cried Rose, pressing forward;
but Susan put her finger upon her lips, and pointed to her mother's
window.  Philip's pipe stopped instantly.

"Thank you," said Susan, "my mother is ill; I can't leave her, you know."
Then gently putting aside the crown, her companions bid her say who
should wear it for her.

"Will you, dear Rose?" said she, placing the garland upon her friend's
head.  "It's a charming May morning," added she, with a smile; "good-bye.
We sha'n't hear your voices or the pipe when you have turned the corner
into the village; so you need only stop till then, Philip."

"I shall stop for all day," said Philip:  "I've no mind to play any
more."

"Good-bye, poor Susan.  It is a pity you can't come with us," said all
the children; and little Mary ran after Susan to the cottage door.

"I forgot to thank you," said she, "for the double cowslips; look how
pretty they are, and smell how sweet the violets are in my bosom, and
kiss me quick, for I shall be left behind."  Susan kissed the little
breathless girl, and returned softly to the side of her mother's bed.

"How grateful that child is to me, for a cowslip only!  How can I be
grateful enough to such a mother as this?" said Susan to herself, as she
bent over her sleeping mother's pale countenance.

Her mother's unfinished knitting lay upon a table near the bed, and Susan
sat down in her wicker arm-chair, and went on with the row, in the middle
of which her hand stopped the preceding evening.  "She taught me to knit,
she taught me everything that I know," thought Susan, "and the best of
all, she taught me to love her, to wish to be like her."

Her mother, when she awakened, felt much refreshed by her tranquil sleep,
and observing that it was a delightful morning, said, "that she had been
dreaming she heard music; but that the drum frightened her, because she
thought it was the signal for her husband to be carried away by a whole
regiment of soldiers, who had pointed their bayonets at him.  But that
was but a dream, Susan; I awoke, and knew it was a dream, and I then fell
asleep, and have slept soundly ever since."

How painful it is to awake to the remembrance of misfortune.  Gradually
as this poor woman collected her scattered thoughts, she recalled the
circumstances of the preceding evening.  She was too certain that she had
heard from her husband's own lips the words, "I MUST LEAVE YOU IN THREE
DAYS"; and she wished that she could sleep again, and think it all a
dream.

"But he'll want, he'll want a hundred things," said she, starting up.  "I
must get his linen ready for him.  I'm afraid it's very late.  Susan, why
did you let me lie so long?"

"Everything shall be ready, dear mother; only don't hurry yourself," said
Susan.  And indeed her mother was ill able to bear any hurry, or to do
any work this day.  Susan's affectionate, dexterous, sensible activity
was never more wanted, or more effectual.  She understood so readily, she
obeyed so exactly; and when she was left to her own discretion, judged so
prudently, that her mother had little trouble and no anxiety in directing
her.  She said that Susan never did too little, or too much.

Susan was mending her father's linen, when Rose tapped softly at the
window, and beckoned to her to come out.  She went out.  "How does your
mother do, in the first place?" said Rose.

"Better, thank you."

"That's well, and I have a little bit of good news for you besides--
here," said she, pulling out a glove, in which there was money, "we'll
get the guinea-hen back again--we have all agreed about it.  This is the
money that has been given to us in the village this May morning.  At
every door they gave silver.  See how generous they have been--twelve
shillings, I assure you.  Now we are a match for Miss Barbara.  You won't
like to leave home; I'll go to Barbara, and you shall see your guinea-hen
in ten minutes."

Rose hurried away, pleased with her commission, and to accomplish her
business.  Miss Barbara's maid Betty was the first person that was
visible at the attorney's house.  Rose insisted upon seeing Miss Barbara
herself, and she was shown into a parlour to the young lady, who was
reading a dirty novel, which she put under a heap of law papers as they
entered.

"Dear, how you STARTLED me!  Is it only you?" said she to her maid; but
as soon as she saw Rose behind the maid, she put on a scornful air.
"Could not ye say I was not at home, Betty?  Well, my good girl, what
brings you here?  Something to borrow or beg, I suppose."

May every ambassador--every ambassador in as good a cause--answer with as
much dignity and moderation as Rose replied to Barbara upon the present
occasion.  She assured her, that the person from whom she came did not
send her either to beg or borrow; that she was able to pay the full value
of that for which she came to ask; and, producing her well filled purse,
"I believe that this is a very good shilling," said she.  "If you don't
like it, I will change it, and now you will be so good as to give me
Susan's guinea-hen.  It is in her name I ask for it."

"No matter in whose name you ask for it," replied Barbara, "you will not
have it.  Take up your shilling, if you please.  I would have taken a
shilling yesterday, if it had been paid at the time properly; but I told
Susan, that if it was not paid then, I should keep the hen, and so I
shall, I promise her.  You may go back, and tell her so."

The attorney's daughter had, whilst Rose opened her negotiation, measured
the depth of her purse with a keen eye; and her penetration discovered
that it contained at least ten shillings.  With proper management she had
some hopes that the guinea-hen might be made to bring in at least half
the money.

Rose, who was of a warm temper, not quite so fit a match as she had
thought herself for the wily Barbara, incautiously exclaimed, "Whatever
it costs us, we are determined to have Susan's favourite hen; so, if one
shilling won't do, take two; and if two won't do, why, take three."

The shillings sounded provoking upon the table, as she threw them down
one after another, and Barbara coolly replied, "Three won't do."

"Have you no conscience, Miss Barbara?  Then take four."  Barbara shook
her head.  A fifth shilling was instantly proffered; but Bab, who now saw
plainly that she had the game in her own hands, preserved a cold, cruel
silence.  Rose went on rapidly, bidding shilling after shilling, till she
had completely emptied her purse.  The twelve shillings were spread upon
the table.  Barbara's avarice was moved, she consented for this ransom to
liberate her prisoner.

Rose pushed the money towards her; but just then, recollecting that she
was acting for others more than for herself, and doubting whether she had
full powers to conclude such an extravagant bargain, she gathered up the
public treasure, and with newly-recovered prudence observed that she must
go back to consult her friends.  Her generous little friends were amazed
at Barbara's meanness, but with one accord declared that they were most
willing, for their parts, to give up every farthing of the money.  They
all went to Susan in a body, and told her so.  "There's our purse," said
they;  "do what you please with it."  They would not wait for one word of
thanks, but ran away, leaving only Rose with her to settle the treaty for
the guinea-hen.

There is a certain manner of accepting a favour, which shows true
generosity of mind.  Many know how to give, but few know how to accept a
gift properly.  Susan was touched, but not astonished, by the kindness of
her young friends, and she received the purse with as much simplicity as
she would have given it.

"Well," said Rose, "shall I go back for the guinea-hen?"

"The guinea-hen!" said Susan, starting from a reverie into which she had
fallen, as she contemplated the purse.  "Certainly I DO long to see my
pretty guinea-hen once more; but I was not thinking of her just then--I
was thinking of my father."

Now Susan had heard her mother often, in the course of this day, wish
that she had but money enough in the world to pay John Simpson for going
to serve in the militia instead of her husband.  "This, to be sure, will
go but a little way," thought Susan; "but still it may be of some use to
my father."  She told her mind to Rose, and concluded by saying,
decidedly, that "if the money was given to her to dispose of as she
pleased, she would give it to her father."

"It is all yours, my dear, good Susan," cried Rose, with a look of warm
approbation.  "This is so like you--but I'm sorry that Miss Bab must keep
your guinea-hen.  I would not be her for all the guinea-hens, or guineas
either, in the whole world.  Why, I'll answer for it, the guinea-hen
won't make her happy, and you'll be happy EVEN without; because you are
good.  Let me come and help you to-morrow," continued she, looking at
Susan's work, "if you have any more mending work to do--I never liked
work till I worked with you.  I won't forget my thimble or my scissors,"
added she, laughing--"though I used to forget them when I was a giddy
girl.  I assure you I am a great hand at my needle, now--try me."

Susan assured her friend that she did not doubt the powers of her needle,
and that she would most willingly accept of her services, but that
UNLUCKILY she had finished all the needle work immediately wanted.

"But do you know," said she, "I shall have a great deal of business to-
morrow; but I won't tell you what it is that I have to do, for I am
afraid I shall not succeed; but if I do succeed, I'll come and tell you
directly, because you will be so glad of it."

Susan, who had always been attentive to what her mother taught her, and
who had often assisted her when she was baking bread and cakes for the
family at the Abbey, had now formed the courageous, but not presumptuous
idea, that she could herself undertake to bake a batch of bread.  One of
the servants from the Abbey had been sent all round the village in the
morning in search of bread, and had not been able to procure any that was
tolerable.  Mrs. Price's last baking failed for want of good barm.  She
was not now strong enough to attempt another herself; and when the
brewer's boy came with eagerness to tell her that he had some fine fresh
yeast, she thanked him, but sighed, and said it would be of no use to
her.  Accordingly she went to work with much prudent care, and when her
bread the next morning came out of the oven, it was excellent; at least
her mother said so, and she was a good judge.  It was sent to the Abbey;
and as the family there had not tasted any good bread since their arrival
in the country, they also were earnest and warm in its praise.  Inquiries
were made from the housekeeper, and they heard, with some surprise, that
this excellent bread was made by a young girl only twelve years old.

The housekeeper, who had known Susan from a child, was pleased to have an
opportunity in speaking in her favour.  "She is the most industrious
little creature, ma'am, in the world," said she to her mistress.  "Little
I can't so well call her now, since she's grown tall and slender to look
at; and glad I am she is grown up likely to look at; for handsome is that
handsome does; she thinks no more of her being handsome than I do myself;
yet she has as proper a respect for herself, ma'am, as you have; and I
always see her neat, and with her mother, ma'am, or fit people, as a girl
should be.  As for her mother, she dotes upon her, as well she may; for I
should myself if I had half such a daughter; and then she has two little
brothers; and she's as good to them, and, my boy Philip says, taught 'em
to read more than the school-mistress, all with tenderness and good
nature; but, I beg your pardon, ma'am, I cannot stop myself when I once
begin to talk of Susan."

"You have really said enough to excite my curiosity," said her mistress;
"pray send for her immediately; we can see her before we go out to walk."

The benevolent housekeeper despatched her boy Philip for Susan, who never
happened to be in such an UNTIDY state as to be unable to obey a summons
without a long preparation.  She had, it is true, been very busy; but
orderly people can be busy and neat at the same time.  She put on her
usual straw hat, and accompanied Rose's mother, who was going with a
basket of cleared muslin to the Abbey.

The modest simplicity of Susan's appearance and the artless propriety of
the answers she gave to all the questions that were asked her, pleased
the ladies at the Abbey, who were good judges of character and manners.

Sir Arthur Somers had two sisters, sensible, benevolent women.  They were
not of that race of fine ladies who are miserable the moment they come to
THE COUNTRY; nor yet were they of that bustling sort, who quack and
direct all their poor neighbours, for the mere love of managing, or the
want of something to do.  They were judiciously generous; and whilst they
wished to diffuse happiness, they were not peremptory in requiring that
people should be happy precisely their own way.  With these dispositions,
and with a well informed brother, who, though he never wished to direct,
was always willing to assist in their efforts to do good, there were
reasonable hopes that these ladies would be a blessing to the poor
villagers amongst whom they were now settled.

As soon as Miss Somers had spoken to Susan, she inquired for her brother;
but Sir Arthur was in his study, and a gentleman was with him on
business.

Susan was desirous of returning to her mother, and the ladies therefore
would not detain her.  Miss Somers told her, with a smile, when she took
leave, that she would call upon her in the evening at six o'clock.

It was impossible that such a grand event as Susan's visit to the Abbey
could long remain unknown to Barbara Case and her gossiping maid.  They
watched eagerly for the moment of her return, that they might satisfy
their curiosity.  "There she is, I declare, just come into her garden,"
cried Bab; "I'll run in and get it all out of her in a minute."

Bab could descend, without shame, whenever it suited her purposes, from
the height of insolent pride to the lowest meanness of fawning
familiarity.

Susan was gathering some marigolds and some parsley for her mother's
broth.

"So, Susan," said Bab, who came close up to her before she perceived it,
"how goes the world with you to-day?"

"My mother is rather better to-day, she says, ma'am--thank you," replies
Susan, coldly but civilly.

"MA'AM! dear, how polite we are grown of a sudden!" cried Bab, winking at
her maid.  "One may see you've been in good company this morning--hey,
Susan?  Come, let's hear about it."

"Did you see the ladies themselves, or was it only the housekeeper sent
for you?" said the maid.

"What room did you go into?" continued Bab.  "Did you see Miss Somers, or
Sir Arthur?"

"Miss Somers."

"La! she saw Miss Somers!  Betty, I must hear about it.  Can't you stop
gathering those things for a minute, and chat a bit with us, Susan?"

"I can't stay, indeed, Miss Barbara; for my mother's broth is just
wanted, and I'm in a hurry."  Susan ran home.

"Lord, her head is full of broth now," said Bab to her maid; "and she has
not a word for herself, though she has been abroad.  My papa may well
call her Simple Susan; for simple she is, and simple she will be, all the
world over.  For my part, I think she's little better than a downright
simpleton.  But, however, simple or not, I'll get what I want out of her.
She'll be able to speak, maybe, when she has settled the grand matter of
the broth.  I'll step in and ask to see her mother, that will put her in
a good humour in a trice."

Barbara followed Susan into the cottage, and found her occupied with the
grand affair of the broth.  "Is it ready?" said Bab, peeping into the pot
that was over the fire.  "Dear, how savoury it smells!  I'll wait till
you go in with it to your mother; for I must ask her how she does
myself."

"Will you please to sit down then, miss," said Simple Susan, with a
smile; for at this instant she forgot the guinea-hen; "I have but just
put the parsley into the broth; but it soon will be ready."

During this interval Bab employed herself, much to her own satisfaction,
in cross-questioning Susan.  She was rather provoked indeed that she
could not learn exactly how each of the ladies was dressed, and what
there was to be for dinner at the Abbey; and she was curious beyond
measure to find out what Miss Somers meant, by saying that she would call
at Mr. Price's cottage at six o'clock in the evening.  "What do you think
she could mean?"

"I thought she meant what she said," replied Susan, "that she would come
here at six o'clock."

"Ay, that's as plain as a pike-staff," said Barbara; "but what else did
she mean, think you?  People, you know, don't always mean exactly,
downright, neither more nor less than what they say."

"Not always," said Susan, with an arch smile, which convinced Barbara
that she was not quite a simpleton.

"NOT ALWAYS," repeated Barbara colouring,--"oh, then I suppose you have
some guess at what Miss Somers meant."

"No," said Susan, "I was not thinking about Miss Somers, when I said not
always."

"How nice that broth does look," resumed Barbara, after a pause.

Susan had now poured the broth into a basin, and as she strewed over it
the bright orange marigolds, it looked very tempting.  She tasted it, and
added now a little salt, and now a little more, till she thought it was
just to her mother's taste.

"Oh! _I_ must taste it," said Bab, taking the basin up greedily.

"Won't you take a spoon?" said Susan, trembling at the large mouthfuls
which Barbara sucked up with a terrible noise.

"Take a spoonful, indeed!" exclaimed Barbara, setting down the basin in
high anger.  "The next time I taste your broth you shall affront me, if
you dare!  The next time I set my foot in this house, you shall be as
saucy to me as you please."  And she flounced out of the house, repeating
"TAKE A SPOON, PIG, was what you meant to say."

Susan stood in amazement at the beginning of this speech; but the
concluding words explained to her the mystery.

Some years before this time, when Susan was a very little girl, and could
scarcely speak plain, as she was eating a basin of bread and milk for her
supper at the cottage door, a great pig came up, and put his nose into
the basin.  Susan was willing that the pig should have some share of the
bread and milk; but as she ate with a spoon and he with his large mouth,
she presently discovered that he was likely to have more than his share;
and in a simple tone of expostulation she said to him, "Take a POON,
pig."*  The saying become proverbial in the village.  Susan's little
companions repeated it, and applied it upon many occasions, whenever
anyone claimed more than his share of anything good.  Barbara, who was
then not Miss Barbara, but plain Bab, and who had played with all the
poor children in the neighbourhood, was often reproved in her unjust
methods of division by Susan's proverb.  Susan, as she grew up, forgot
the childish saying; but the remembrance of it rankled in Barbara's mind,
and it was to this that she suspected Susan had alluded, when she
recommended a spoon to her, whilst she was swallowing the basin of broth.

*This is a true anecdote.

"La, miss," said Barbara's maid, when she found her mistress in a passion
upon her return from Susan's, "I only wondered you did her the honour to
set your foot within her doors.  What need have you to trouble her for
news about the Abbey folks, when your own papa has been there all the
morning, and is just come in, and can tell you everything?"

Barbara did not know that her father meant to go to the Abbey that
morning, for Attorney Case was mysterious even to his own family about
his morning rides.  He never chose to be asked where he was going, or
where he had been; and this made his servants more than commonly
inquisitive to trace him.

Barbara, against whose apparent childishness and real cunning he was not
sufficiently on his guard, had often the art of drawing him into
conversation about his visits.  She ran into her father's parlour; but
she knew, the moment she saw his face, that it was no time to ask
questions; his pen was across his mouth, and his brown wig pushed oblique
upon his contracted forehead.  The wig was always pushed crooked whenever
he was in a brown or rather, a black study.  Barbara, who did not, like
Susan, bear with her father's testy humour from affection and gentleness
of disposition, but who always humoured him from artifice, tried all her
skill to fathom his thoughts, and when she found that it would not do,
she went to tell her maid so, and to complain that her father was so
cross there was no bearing him.

It is true that Attorney Case was not in the happiest mood possible; for
he was by no means satisfied with his morning's work at the Abbey.  Sir
Arthur Somers, the NEW MAN, did not suit him, and he began to be rather
apprehensive that he should not suit Sir Arthur.  He had sound reasons
for his doubts.

Sir Arthur Somers was an excellent lawyer, and a perfectly honest man.
This seemed to our attorney a contradiction in terms; in the course of
his practice the case had not occurred; and he had no precedents ready to
direct his proceedings.  Sir Arthur was also a man of wit and eloquence,
yet of plain dealing and humanity.  The attorney could not persuade
himself to believe that his benevolence was anything but enlightened
cunning, and his plain dealing he one minute dreaded as the masterpiece
of art, and the next despised as the characteristic of folly.  In short,
he had not yet decided whether he was an honest man or a knave.  He had
settled accounts with him for his late agency, and had talked about
sundry matters of business.  He constantly perceived, however, that he
could not impose upon Sir Arthur; but the idea that he could know all the
mazes of the law, and yet prefer the straight road, was incomprehensible.

Mr. Case, having paid Sir Arthur some compliments on his great legal
abilities, and his high reputation at the bar, he coolly replied, "I have
left the bar."  The attorney looked in unfeigned astonishment, that a man
who was actually making 3,OOO pounds per annum at the bar should leave
it.

"I am come," said Sir Arthur, "to enjoy that kind of domestic life in the
country which I prefer to all others, and amongst people whose happiness
I hope to increase."  At this speech the attorney changed his ground,
flattering himself that he should find his man averse to business, and
ignorant of country affairs.  He talked of the value of land, and of new
leases.

Sir Arthur wished to enlarge his domain, and to make a ride round it.  A
map of it was lying upon the table, and Farmer Price's garden came
exactly across the new road for the ride.  Sir Arthur looked
disappointed; and the keen attorney seized the moment to inform him that
"Price's whole land was at his disposal."

"At my disposal! how so?" cried Sir Arthur, eagerly; "it will not be out
of lease, I believe, these ten years.  I'll look into the rent roll
again; perhaps I am mistaken."

"You are mistaken, my good sir, and you are not mistaken," said Mr. Case,
with a shrewd smile.  "In one sense, the land will not be out of lease
these ten years, and in another it is out of lease at this present time.
To come to the point at once, the lease is, ab origine, null and void.  I
have detected a capital flaw in the body of it.  I pledge my credit upon
it, sir, it can't stand a single term in law or equity."

The attorney observed, that at these words Sir Arthur's eye was fixed
with a look of earnest attention.  "Now I have him," said the cunning
tempter to himself.

"Neither in law nor equity," repeated Sir Arthur, with apparent
incredulity.  "Are you sure of that, Mr. Case?"

"Sure!  As I told you before, sir, I'd pledge my whole credit upon the
thing--I'd stake my existence."

"THAT'S SOMETHING," said Sir Arthur, as if he was pondering upon the
matter.

The attorney went on with all the eagerness of a keen man, who sees a
chance at one stroke of winning a rich friend, and of ruining a poor
enemy.  He explained, with legal volubility and technical amplification,
the nature of the mistake in Mr. Price's lease.  "It was, sir," said he,
"a lease for the life of Peter Price, Susanna his wife, and to the
survivor or survivors of them, or for the full time and term of twenty
years, to be computed from the first day of May then next ensuing.  Now,
sir, this, you see, is a lease in reversion, which the late Sir Benjamin
Somers had not, by his settlement, a right to make.  This is a curious
mistake, you see, Sir Arthur; and in filling up those printed leases
there's always a good chance of some flaw.  I find it perpetually; but I
never found a better than this in the whole course of my practice."

Sir Arthur stood in silence.

"My dear sir," said the attorney, taking him by the button, "you have no
scruple of stirring in this business?"

"A little," said Sir Arthur.

"Why, then, that can be done away in a moment.  Your name shall not
appear in it at all.  You have nothing to do but to make over the lease
to me.  I make all safe to you with my bond.  Now, being in possession, I
come forward in my own proper person.  SHALL I PROCEED?"

"No--you have said enough," replied Sir Arthur.

"The case, indeed, lies in a nutshell," said the attorney, who had by
this time worked himself up to such a pitch of professional enthusiasm,
that, intent upon his vision of a lawsuit, he totally forgot to observe
the impression his words made upon Sir Arthur.

"There's only one thing we have forgotten all this time," said Sir
Arthur.

"What can that be, sir?"

"That we shall ruin this poor man."

Case was thunderstruck at these words, or rather, by the look which
accompanied them.  He recollected that he had laid himself open before he
was sure of Sir Arthur's REAL character.  He softened, and said he should
have had certainly more CONSIDERATION in the case of any but a litigious,
pig-headed fellow, as he knew Price to be.

"If he be litigious," said Sir Arthur, "I shall certainly be glad to get
him fairly out of the parish as soon as possible.  When you go home, you
will be so good, sir, as to send me his lease, that I may satisfy myself
before we stir in this business."

The attorney, brightening up, prepared to take leave; but he could not
persuade himself to take his departure without making one push at Sir
Arthur about the agency.

"I will not trouble you, Sir Arthur, with this lease of Price's," said
Case; "I'll leave it with your agent.  Whom shall I apply to?"

"TO MYSELF, sir, if you please," replied Sir Arthur.

The courtiers of Louis the Fourteenth could not have looked more
astounded than our attorney, when they received from their monarch a
similar answer.  It was this unexpected reply of Sir Arthur's which had
deranged the temper of Mr. Case, and caused his wig to stand so crooked
upon his forehead, and which had rendered him impenetrably silent to his
inquisitive daughter Barbara.

After having walked up and down his room, conversing with himself, for
some time, the attorney concluded that the agency must be given to
somebody when Sir Arthur should have to attend his duty in Parliament;
that the agency, even for the winter season, was not a thing to be
neglected; and that, if he managed well, he might yet secure it for
himself.  He had often found that small timely presents worked
wonderfully upon his own mind, and he judged of others by himself.  The
tenants had been in the reluctant but constant practice of making him
continual petty offerings; and he resolved to try the same course with
Sir Arthur, whose resolution to be his own agent, he thought, argued a
close, saving, avaricious disposition.  He had heard the housekeeper at
the Abbey inquiring, as he passed through the servants, whether there was
any lamb to be gotten?  She said that Sir Arthur was remarkably fond of
lamb, and that she wished she could get a quarter for him.  Immediately
he sallied into his kitchen, as soon as the idea struck him, and asked a
shepherd, who was waiting there, whether he knew of a nice fat lamb to be
had anywhere in the neighbourhood.

"I know of one," cried Barbara.  "Susan Price has a pet lamb that's as
fat as fat could be."  The attorney easily caught at these words, and
speedily devised a scheme for obtaining Susan's lamb for nothing.

It would be something strange if an attorney of his talents and standing
was not an over-match for Simple Susan.  He prowled forth in search of
his prey.  He found Susan packing up her father's little wardrobe; and
when she looked up as she knelt, he saw that she had been in tears.

"How is your mother to-day, Susan?" inquired the attorney.

"Worse, sir.  My father goes to-morrow."

"That's a pity."

"It can't be helped," said Susan, with a sigh.

"It can't be helped--how do you know that?" said Case.

"Sir, DEAR sir!" cried she, looking up at him, and a sudden ray of hope
beamed in her ingenuous countenance.

"And if YOU could help it, Susan?" said he.  Susan clasped her hands in
silence, more expressive than words.  "You CAN help it, Susan."  She
started up in an ecstasy.  "What would you give now to have your father
at home for a whole week longer?"

"Anything!--but I have nothing."

"Yes, but you have, a lamb," said the hard-hearted attorney.

"My poor little lamb!" said Susan; "but what can that do?"

"What good can any lamb do?  Is not lamb good to eat?  Why do you look so
pale, girl?  Are not sheep killed every day, and don't you eat mutton?
Is your lamb better than anybody else's, think you?"

"I don't know," said Susan, "but I love it better."

"More fool you," said he.

"It feeds out of hand, it follows me about; I have always taken care of
it; my mother gave it to me."

"Well, say no more about it, then," he cynically observed; "if you love
your lamb better than both your father and your mother, keep it, and good
morning to you."

"Stay, oh stay!" cried Susan, catching the skirt of his coat with an
eager, trembling hand;--"a whole week, did you say?  My mother may get
better in that time.  No, I do not love my lamb half so well."  The
struggle of her mind ceased, and with a placid countenance and calm
voice, "take the lamb," said she.

"Where is it?" said the attorney.

"Grazing in the meadow, by the river side."

"It must be brought up before night-fall for the butcher, remember."

"I shall not forget it," said Susan, steadily.

As soon, however, as her persecutor turned his back and quitted the
house, Susan sat down, and hid her face in her hands.  She was soon
aroused by the sound of her mother's feeble voice, who was calling Susan
from the inner room where she lay.  Susan went in; but did not undraw the
curtain as she stood beside the bed.

"Are you there, love?  Undraw the curtain, that I may see you, and tell
me;--I thought I heard some strange voice just now talking to my child.
Something's amiss, Susan," said her mother, raising herself as well as
she was able in the bed, to examine her daughter's countenance.

"Would you think it amiss, then, my dear mother," said Susan, stooping to
kiss her--"would you think it amiss, if my father was to stay with us a
week longer?"

"Susan! you don't say so?"

"He is, indeed, a whole week;--but how burning hot your hand is still."

"Are you sure he will stay?" inquired her mother.  "How do you know?  Who
told you so?  Tell me all quick."

"Attorney Case told me so; he can get him a week's longer leave of
absence, and he has promised he will."

"God bless him for it, for ever and ever!" said the poor woman, joining
her hands.  "May the blessing of heaven be with him!"

Susan closed the curtains, and was silent.  She COULD NOT SAY AMEN.  She
was called out of the room at this moment, for a messenger was come from
the Abbey for the bread-bills.  It was she who always made out the bills,
for though she had not a great number of lessons from the writing-master,
she had taken so much pains to learn that she could write a very neat,
legible hand, and she found this very useful.  She was not, to be sure,
particularly inclined to draw out a long bill at this instant, but
business must be done.  She set to work, ruled her lines for the pounds,
shillings and pence, made out the bill for the Abbey, and despatched the
impatient messenger.  She then resolved to make out all the bills for the
neighbours, who had many of them taken a few loaves and rolls of her
baking.  "I had better get all my business finished," said she to
herself, "before I go down to the meadow to take leave of my poor lamb."

This was sooner said than done, for she found that she had a great number
of bills to write, and the slate on which she had entered the account was
not immediately to be found; and when it was found the figures were
almost rubbed out.  Barbara had sat down upon it.  Susan pored over the
number of loaves, and the names of the persons who took them; and she
wrote and cast up sums, and corrected and re-corrected them, till her
head grew quite puzzled.

The table was covered with little square bits of paper, on which she had
been writing bills over and over again, when her father came in with a
bill in his hand.  "How's this, Susan?" said he.  "How can ye be so
careless, child?  What is your head running upon?  Here, look at the bill
you were sending up to the Abbey?  I met the messenger, and luckily asked
to see how much it was.  Look at it."

Susan looked and blushed; it was written, "Sir Arthur Somers, to John
Price, debtor, six dozen LAMBS, so much."  She altered it, and returned
it to her father; but he had taken up some of the papers which lay upon
the table.  "What are all these, child?"

"Some of them are wrong, and I've written them out again," said Susan.

"Some of them!  All of them, I think, seem to be wrong, if I can read,"
said her father, rather angrily, and he pointed out to her sundry strange
mistakes.  Her head, indeed, had been running upon her poor lamb.  She
corrected all the mistakes with so much patience, and bore to be blamed
with so much good humour, that her father at last said, that it was
impossible ever to scold Susan, without being in the wrong at the last.

As soon as all was set right, Price took the bills, and said he would go
round to the neighbours, and collect the money himself; for that he
should be very proud to have it to say to them, that it was all earned by
his own little daughter.

Susan resolved to keep the pleasure of telling him of his week's reprieve
till he should come home to sup, as he had promised to do, in her
mother's room.  She was not sorry to hear him sigh as he passed the
knapsack, which she had been packing up for his journey.  "How delighted
he will be when he hears the good news!" said she, to herself; "but I
know he will be a little sorry too for my poor lamb."

As Susan had now settled all her business, she thought she could have
