time to go down to the meadow by the river side to see her favourite; but
just as she had tied on her straw hat the village clock struck four, and
this was the hour at which she always went to fetch her little brothers
home from a dame-school near the village.  She knew that they would be
disappointed, if she was later than usual, and she did not like to keep
them waiting, because they were very patient, good boys; so she put off
the visit to her lamb, and went immediately for her brothers.



CHAPTER II.

     Ev'n in the spring and playtime of the year,
     That calls th' unwonted villager abroad,
     With all her little ones, a sportive train,
     To gather king-cups in the yellow mead,
     And prink their heads with daisies.
                                        Cowper.

The dame-school, which was about a mile from the hamlet, was not a showy
edifice; but it was reverenced as much by the young race of village
scholars as if it had been the most stately mansion in the land; it was a
low roofed, long, thatched tenement, sheltered by a few reverend oaks,
under which many generations of hopeful children had gambolled in their
turn.

The close shaven green, which sloped down from the hatch-door of the
schoolroom, was paled round with a rude paling, which, though decayed in
some parts by time, was not in any place broken by violence.

The place bespoke order and peace.  The dame who governed was well
obeyed, because she was just and well beloved, and because she was ever
glad to give well earned praise and pleasure to her little subjects.

Susan had once been under her gentle dominion, and had been deservedly
her favourite scholar.  The dame often cited her as the best example to
the succeeding tribe of emulous youngsters.  She had scarcely opened the
wicket which separated the green before the schoolroom door from the
lane, when she heard the merry voices of the children, and saw the little
troup issuing from the hatchway, and spreading over the green.

"Oh, there's Susan!" cried her two little brothers, running, leaping, and
bounding up to her; and many of the other rosy girls and boys crowded
round her, to talk of their plays; for Susan was easily interested in all
that made others happy; but she could not make them comprehend, that, if
they all spoke at once it was not possible that she could hear what was
said.

The voices were still raised one above another, all eager to establish
some important observation about ninepins, or marbles, or tops, or bows
and arrows, when suddenly music was heard and the crowd was silenced.
The music seemed to be near the spot where the children were standing,
and they looked round to see whence it could come.  Susan pointed to the
great oak-tree, and they beheld, seated under its shade, an old man
playing upon his harp.  The children all approached--at first timidly,
for the sounds were solemn; but as the harper heard their little
footsteps coming towards him, he changed his hand and played one of his
most lively tunes.  The circle closed, and pressed nearer and nearer to
him; some who were in the foremost row whispered to each other, "He is
blind!"  "What a pity!" and "He looks very poor,--what a ragged coat he
wears!" said others.  "He must be very old, for all his hair is white;
and he must have travelled a great way, for his shoes are quite worn
out," observed another.

All these remarks were made whilst he was tuning his harp, for when he
once more began to play, not a word was uttered.  He seemed pleased by
their simple exclamations of wonder and delight, and, eager to amuse his
young audience, he played now a gay and now a pathetic air, to suit their
several humours.

Susan's voice, which was soft and sweet, expressive of gentleness and
good nature, caught his ear the moment she spoke.  He turned his face
eagerly to the place where she stood; and it was observed, that whenever
she said that she liked any tune particularly he played it over again.

"I am blind," said the old man, "and cannot see your faces; but I know
you all asunder by your voices, and I can guess pretty well at all your
humours and characters by your voices."

"Can you so, indeed?" cried Susan's little brother William, who had
stationed himself between the old man's knees.  "Then you heard MY sister
Susan speak just now.  Can you tell us what sort of person she is?"

"That I can, I think, without being a conjurer," said the old man,
lifting the boy up on his knee; "YOUR sister Susan is good-natured."  The
boy clapped his hands.  "And good-tempered."  "RIGHT," said little
William, with a louder clap of applause.  "And very fond of the little
boy who sits upon my knee."  "O right! right! quite right!" exclaimed the
child, and "quite right" echoed on all sides.

"But how came you to know so much, when you are blind?" said William,
examining the old man attentively.

"Hush," said John, who was a year older than his brother, and very sage,
"you should not put him in mind of his being blind."

"Though I am blind," said the harper, "I can hear, you know, and I heard
from your sister herself all that I told you of her, that she was good-
tempered and good-natured and fond of you."

"Oh, that's wrong--you did not hear all that from herself, I'm sure,"
said John, "for nobody ever hears her praising herself."

"Did not I hear her tell you," said the harper, "when you first came
round me, that she was in a great hurry to go home, but that she would
stay a little while, since you wished it so much?  Was not that good-
natured?  And when you said you did not like the tune she liked best, she
was not angry with you, but said, 'Then play William's first, if you
please,'--was not that good-tempered?"

"Oh," interrupted William, "it's all true; but how did you find out that
she was fond of me?"

"That is such a difficult question," said the harper, "that I must take
time to consider."  The harper tuned his instrument, as he pondered, or
seemed to ponder:  and at this instant, two boys who had been searching
for birds' nests in the hedges, and who had heard the sound of the harp,
came blustering up, and pushing their way through the circle, one of them
exclaimed, "What's going on here?  Who are you, my old fellow?  A blind
harper!  Well, play us a tune, if you can play ever a good one--play me--
let's see, what shall he play, Bob?" added he turning to his companion.
"Bumper Squire Jones."

The old man, though he did not seem quite pleased with the peremptory
manner of the request, played, as he was desired, "Bumper Squire Jones";
and several other tunes were afterwards bespoke by the same rough and
tyrannical voice.

The little children shrunk back in timid silence, and eyed the brutal boy
with dislike.  This boy was the son of Attorney Case; and as his father
had neglected to correct his temper when he was a child, as he grew up it
became insufferable.  All who were younger and weaker than himself,
dreaded his approach, and detested him as a tyrant.

When the old harper was so tired that he could play no more, a lad, who
usually carried his harp for him, and who was within call, came up, and
held his master's hat to the company, saying, "Will you be pleased to
remember us?"  The children readily produced their halfpence, and thought
their wealth well bestowed upon this poor, good-natured man, who had
taken so much pains to entertain them, better even than upon the
gingerbread woman, whose stall they loved to frequent.  The hat was held
some time to the attorney's son before he chose to see it.  At last he
put his hand surlily into his waistcoat pocket and pulled out a shilling.
There were sixpennyworth of halfpence in the hat.  "I'll take these
halfpence," said he, "and here's a shilling for you."

"God bless you, sir," said the lad; but as he took the shilling which the
young gentleman had slily put INTO THE BLIND MAN'S HAND, he saw that it
was not worth one farthing.  "I am afraid it is not good, sir," said the
lad, whose business it was to examine the money for his master.

"I am afraid, then, you'll get no other," said young Case, with an
insulting laugh.

"It never will do, sir," persisted the lad; "look at it yourself; the
edges are all yellow! you can see the copper through it quite plain.
Sir, nobody will take it from us."

"That's your affair," said the brutal boy, pushing away his hand.  "You
may pass it, you know, as well as I do, if you look sharp.  You have
taken it from me, and I shan't take it back again, I promise you."

A whisper of "that's very unjust," was heard.  The little assembly,
though under evident constraint, could no longer suppress their
indignation.

"Who says it's unjust?" cried the tyrant, sternly, looking down upon his
judges.

Susan's little brothers had held her gown fast, to prevent her from
moving at the beginning of this contest, and she was now so much
interested to see the end of it, that she stood still, without making any
resistance.

"Is anyone here amongst yourselves a judge of silver?" said the old man.

"Yes, here's the butcher's boy," said the attorney's son; "show it to
him."  He was a sickly-looking boy, and of a remarkably peaceful
disposition.  Young Case fancied that he would be afraid to give judgment
against him.  However, after some moments' hesitation, and after turning
the shilling round several times, he pronounced, "that, as far as his
judgment went, but he did not pretend to be a downright CERTAIN SURE of
it, the shilling was not over and above good."  Then to Susan, to screen
himself from manifest danger, for the attorney's son looked upon him with
a vengeful mien, "But here's Susan here, who understands silver a great
deal better than I do; she takes a power of it for bread, you know."

"I'll leave it to her," said the old harper; "if she says the shilling is
good, keep it, Jack."  The shilling was handed to Susan, who, though she
had with becoming modesty forborne all interference, did not hesitate,
when she was called upon, to speak the truth:  "I think that this
shilling is a bad one," said she; and the gentle but firm tone in which
she pronounced the words, for a moment awed and silenced the angry and
brutal boy.  "There's another, then," cried he; "I have sixpences and
shillings too in plenty, thank my stars."

Susan now walked away with her two little brothers, and all the other
children separated to go to their several homes.  The old harper called
to Susan, and begged, that, if she was going towards the village, she
would be so kind as to show him the way.  His lad took up his harp, and
little William took the old man by the hand.  "I'll lead him, I can lead
him," said he; and John ran on before them, to gather king-cups in the
meadow.

There was a small rivulet, which they had to cross, and as a plank which
served for a bridge over it was rather narrow, Susan was afraid to trust
the old blind man to his little conductor; she therefore went on the
tottering plank first herself, and then led the old harper carefully
over.  They were now come to a gate, which opened upon the high road to
the village.  "There is the high road straight before you," said Susan to
the lad, who was carrying his master's harp; "you can't miss it.  Now I
must bid you a good evening; for I'm in a great hurry to get home, and
must go the short way across the fields here, which would not be so
pleasant for you, because of the stiles.  Good-bye."  The old harper
thanked her, and went along the high road, whilst she and her brothers
tripped on as fast as they could by the short way across the fields.

"Miss Somers, I am afraid, will be waiting for us," said Susan.  "You
know she said she would call at six; and by the length of our shadows I'm
sure it is late."

When they came to their own cottage-door, they heard many voices, and
they saw, when they entered, several ladies standing in the kitchen.
"Come in, Susan; we thought you had quite forsaken us," said Miss Somers
to Susan, who advanced timidly.  "I fancy you forgot that we promised to
pay you a visit this evening, but you need not blush so much about the
matter; there is no great harm done; we have only been here about five
minutes; and we have been well employed in admiring your neat garden, and
your orderly shelves.  Is it you, Susan, who keeps these things in such
nice order?" continued Miss Somers, looking round the kitchen.

Before Susan could reply, little William pushed forward, and answered,
"Yes, ma'am, it is MY sister Susan that keeps everything neat; and she
always comes to school for us, too, which was what caused her to be so
late."

"Because as how," continued John, "she was loth to refuse us the hearing
a blind man play on the harp.  It was we kept her, and we hopes, ma'am,
as you ARE--as you SEEM so good, you won't take it amiss."

Miss Somers and her sister smiled at the affectionate simplicity with
which Susan's little brothers undertook her defence, and they were, from
this slight circumstance, disposed to think yet more favourably of a
family which seemed so well united.  They took Susan along with them
through the village.  Many neighbours came to their doors, and far from
envying, they all secretly wished Susan well as she passed.

"I fancy we shall find what we want here," said Miss Somers, stopping
before a shop, where unfolded sheets of pins and glass buttons glistened
in the window, and where rolls of many coloured ribbons appeared ranged
in tempting order.  She went in, and was rejoiced to see the shelves at
the back of the counter well-furnished with glossy tiers of stuffs, and
gay, neat printed linens and calicoes.

"Now, Susan, choose yourself a gown," said Miss Somers; "you set an
example of industry and good conduct, of which we wish to take public
notice, for the benefit of others."

The shopkeeper, who was father to Susan's friend Rose, looked much
satisfied by this speech, and as if a compliment had been paid to
himself, bowed low to Miss Somers, and then with alertness, which a
London linen-draper might have admired, produced piece after piece of his
best goods to his young customer--unrolled, unfolded, held the bright
stuffs and calendered calicoes in various lights.  Now stretched his arm
to the highest shelves, and brought down in a trice what seemed to be
beyond the reach of any but a giant's arm; now dived into some hidden
recess beneath the counter, and brought to light fresh beauties and fresh
temptations.

Susan looked on with more indifference than most of the spectators.  She
was thinking much of her lamb, and more of her father.

Miss Somers had put a bright guinea into her hand, and had bid her pay
for her own gown; but Susan, as she looked at the guinea, thought it was
a great deal of money to lay out upon herself, and she wished, but did
know like to ask, that she might keep it for a better purpose.

Some people are wholly inattentive to the lesser feelings, and incapable
of reading the countenances of those on whom they bestow their bounty.
Miss Somers and her sister were not of this roughly charitable class.

"She does not like any of these things," whispered Miss Somers to her
sister.  Her sister observed, that Susan looked as if her thoughts were
far distant from gowns.

"If you don't fancy any of these," said the civil shopkeeper to Susan,
"we shall have a new assortment of calicoes for the spring season, soon
from town."

"Oh," interrupted Susan, with a smile and a blush; "these are all pretty,
and too good for me, but--"

"BUT what, Susan?" said Miss Somers.  "Tell us what is passing in your
little mind."  Susan hesitated.  "Well then, we will not press you, you
are scarcely acquainted with us yet; when you are, you will not be
afraid, I hope, to speak your mind.  Put this shining yellow counter,"
continued she, pointing to the guinea, "in your pocket, and make what use
of it you please.  From what we know, and from what we have heard of you,
we are persuaded that you will make a good use of it."

"I think, madam," said the master of the shop, with a shrewd, good
natured look, "I could give a pretty good guess myself what will become
of that guinea; but I say nothing."

"No, that is right," said Miss Somers; "we leave Susan entirely at
liberty; and now we will not detain her any longer.  Good night, Susan,
we shall soon come again to your neat cottage."  Susan curtsied, with an
expressive look of gratitude, and with a modest frankness in her
countenance, which seemed to say, "I would tell you, and welcome, what I
want to do with the guinea; but I am not used to speak before so many
people.  When you come to our cottage again you shall know all."

When Susan had departed, Miss Somers turned to the obliging shopkeeper,
who was folding up all the things he had opened.  "You have had a great
deal of trouble with us, sir," said she; "and since Susan will not choose
a gown for herself, I must."  She selected the prettiest; and whilst the
man was rolling it in paper, she asked him several questions about Susan
and her family, which he was delighted to answer, because he had now all
opportunity of saying as much as he wished in her praise.

"No later back, ma'am, than last May morning," said he, "as my daughter
Rose was telling us, Susan did a turn, in her quiet way, by her mother,
that would not displease you if you were to hear it.  She was to have
been Queen of the May, which in our little village, amongst the younger
tribe, is a thing that is thought of a good deal; but Susan's mother was
ill, and Susan, after sitting up with her all night, would not leave her
in the morning, even when they brought the crown to her.  She put the
crown upon my daughter Rose's head with her own hands; and, to be sure,
Rose loves her as well as if she was her own sister.  But I don't speak
from partiality; for I am no relation whatever to the Prices--only a
well-wisher, as everyone, I believe, who knows them is.  I'll send the
parcel up to the Abbey, shall I, ma'am?"

"If you please," said Miss Somers, "and, as soon as you receive your new
things from town, let us know.  You will, I hope, find us good customers
and well-wishers," added she, with a smile; "for those who wish well to
their neighbours surely deserve to have well-wishers themselves."

A few words may encourage the benevolent passions, and may dispose people
to live in peace and happiness; a few words may set them at variance, and
may lead to misery and lawsuits.  Attorney Case and Miss Somers were both
equally convinced of this, and their practice was uniformly consistent
with their principles.

But now to return to Susan.  She put the bright guinea carefully into the
glove with the twelve shillings, which she had received from her
companions on May day.  Besides this treasure, she calculated that the
amount of the bills for bread could not be less than eight or nine and
thirty shillings; and as her father was now sure of a week's reprieve,
she had great hopes that, by some means or other, it would be possible to
make up the whole sum necessary to pay for a substitute.  "If that could
but be done," said she to herself, "how happy would my mother be.  She
would be quite stout again, for she certainly is a great deal better,
since I told her that father would stay a week longer.  Ah! but she would
not have blessed Attorney Case, though, if she had known about my poor
Daisy."

Susan took the path that led to the meadow by the waterside, resolved to
go by herself, and take leave of her innocent favourite.  But she did not
pass by unperceived.  Her little brothers were watching for her return,
and, as soon as they saw her, they ran after her, and overtook her as she
reached the meadow.

"What did that good lady want with you?" cried William; but, looking up
in his sister's face, he saw tears in her eyes, and he was silent, and
walked on quietly.  Susan saw her lamb by the water-side.  "Who are those
two men?" said William.  "What are they going to do with DAISY?"  The two
men were Attorney Case and the butcher.  The butcher was feeling whether
the lamb was fat.

Susan sat down upon the bank in silent sorrow; her little brothers ran up
to the butcher, and demanded whether he was going to DO ANY HARM to the
lamb.  The butcher did not answer, but the attorney replied, "It is not
your sister's lamb any longer; it's mine--mine to all intents and
purposes."

"Yours!" cried the children, with terror; "and will you kill it?"

"That's the butcher's business."

The little boys now burst into piercing lamentations.  They pushed away
the butcher's hand; they threw their arms round the neck of the lamb;
they kissed its forehead--it bleated.  "It will not bleat to-morrow!"
said William, and he wept bitterly.  The butcher looked aside, and
hastily rubbed his eyes with the corner of his blue apron.

The attorney stood unmoved; he pulled up the head of the lamb, which had
just stooped to crop a mouthful of clover.  "I have no time to waste,"
said he; "butcher, you'll account with me.  If it's fat--the sooner the
better.  I've no more to say."  And he walked off, deaf to the prayers of
the poor children.

As soon as the attorney was out of sight, Susan rose from the bank where
she was seated, came up to her lamb, and stooped to gather some of the
fresh dewy trefoil, to let it eat out of her hand for the last time.
Poor Daisy licked her well known hand.

"Now, let us go," said Susan.

"I'll wait as long as you please," said the butcher.  Susan thanked him,
but walked away quickly, without looking again at her lamb.  Her little
brothers begged the man to stay a few minutes, for they had gathered a
handful of blue speedwell and yellow crowsfoot, and they were decking the
poor animal.  As it followed the boys through the village, the children
collected as they passed, and the butcher's own son was amongst the
number.  Susan's steadiness about the bad shilling was full in this boy's
memory; it had saved him a beating.  He went directly to his father to
beg the life of Susan's lamb.

"I was thinking about it, boy, myself," said the butcher; "it's a sin to
kill a PET LAMB, I'm thinking--any way, it's what I'm not used to, and
don't fancy doing, and I'll go and say as much to Attorney Case; but he's
a hard man; there's but one way to deal with him, and that's the way I
must take, though so be I shall be the loser thereby; but we'll say
nothing to the boys, for fear it might be the thing would not take; and
then it would be worse again to poor Susan, who is a good girl, and
always was, as well as she may, being of a good breed, and well reared
from the first."

"Come, lads, don't keep a crowd and a scandal about my door," continued
he, aloud, to the children; "turn the lamb in here, John, in the paddock,
for to-night, and go your ways home."

The crowd dispersed, but murmured, and the butcher went to the attorney.
"Seeing that all you want is a good, fat, tender lamb, for a present for
Sir Arthur, as you told me," said the butcher, "I could let you have
what's as good or better for your purpose."

"Better--if it's better, I'm ready to hear reason."

The butcher had choice, tender lamb, he said, fit to eat the next day;
and as Mr. Case was impatient to make his offering to Sir Arthur, he
accepted the butcher's proposal, though with such seeming reluctance,
that he actually squeezed out of him, before he would complete the
bargain, a bribe of a fine sweetbread.

In the meantime Susan's brothers ran home to tell her that her lamb was
put into the paddock for the night; this was all they knew, and even this
was some comfort to her.  Rose, her good friend, was with her, and she
had before her the pleasure of telling her father of his week's reprieve.
Her mother was better, and even said she was determined to sit up to
supper in her wicker armchair.

Susan was getting this ready for supper, when little William, who was
standing at the house door, watching in the dusk for his father's return,
suddenly exclaimed, "Susan! if here is not our old man!"

"Yes," said the old harper, "I have found my way to you.  The neighbours
were kind enough to show me whereabouts you lived; for, though I didn't
know your name, they guessed who I meant by what I said of you all."
Susan came to the door, and the old man was delighted to hear her speak
again.  "If it would not be too bold," said he, "I'm a stranger in this
part of the country, and come from afar off.  My boy has got a bed for
himself here in the village; but I have no place.  Could you be so
charitable as to give an old blind man a night's lodging?"  Susan said
she would step in and ask her mother; and she soon returned with an
answer, that he was heartily welcome, if he could sleep upon the
children's bed, which was but small.

The old man thankfully entered the hospitable cottage.  He struck his
head against the low roof, as he stepped over the doorsill.  "Many roofs
that are twice as high are not half so good," said he.  Of this he had
just had experience at the house of the Attorney Case, while he had
asked, but had been roughly refused all assistance by Miss Barbara, who
was, according to her usual custom, standing staring at the hall door.

The old man's harp was set down in Farmer Price's kitchen, and he
promised to play a tune for the boys before they went to bed; their
mother giving them leave to sit up to supper with their father.  He came
home with a sorrowful countenance; but how soon did it brighten, when
Susan, with a smile, said to him, "Father, we've good news for you! good
news for us all!--You have a whole week longer to stay with us; and
perhaps," continued she, putting her little purse into his hands,--
"perhaps with what's here, and the bread bills, and what may somehow be
got together before a week's at an end, we may make up the nine guineas
for the substitute, as they call him.  Who knows, dearest mother, but we
may keep him with us for ever!"  As she spoke, she threw her arms round
her father, who pressed her to his bosom without speaking, for his heart
was full.  He was some little time before he could perfectly believe that
what he heard was true; but the revived smiles of his wife, the noisy joy
of his little boys, and the satisfaction that shone in Susan's
countenance, convinced him that he was not in a dream.

As they sat down to supper, the old harper was made welcome to his share
of the cheerful though frugal meal.

Susan's father, as soon as supper was finished, even before he would let
the harper play a tune for his boys, opened the little purse, which Susan
had given him.  He was surprised at the sight of the twelve shillings,
and still more, when he came to the bottom of the purse, to see the
bright golden guinea.

"How did you come by all this money, Susan?" said he.

"Honestly and handsomely, that I'm sure of beforehand," said her proud
mother; "but how I can't make out, except by the baking.  Hey, Susan is
this your first baking?"

"Oh, no, no," said her father, "I have her first baking snug here,
besides, in my pocket.  I kept it for a surprise, to do your mother's
heart good, Susan.  Here's twenty-nine shillings, and the Abbey bill,
which is not paid yet, comes to ten more.  What think you of this, wife?
Have we not a right to be proud of our Susan?  Why," continued he,
turning to the harper, "I ask your pardon for speaking out so free before
strangers in praise of my own, which I know is not mannerly; but the
truth is the fittest thing to be spoken, as I think, at all times;
therefore, here's your good health, Susan; why, by-and-by she'll be worth
her weight in gold--in silver at least.  But tell us, child, how came you
by all this riches? and how comes it that I don't go to-morrow?  All this
happy news makes me so gay in myself, I'm afraid I shall hardly
understand it rightly.  But speak on, child--first bringing us a bottle
of the good mead you made last year from your own honey."

Susan did not much like to tell the history of her guinea-hen--of the
gown and of her poor lamb.  Part of this would seem as if she was
vaunting of her own generosity, and part of it she did not like to
recollect.  But her mother pressed to know the whole, and she related it
as simply as she could.  When she came to the story of her lamb, her
voice faltered, and everybody present was touched.  The old harper sighed
once, and cleared his throat several times.  He then asked for his harp,
and, after tuning it for a considerable time, he recollected--for he had
often fits of absence--that he sent for it to play the tune he had
promised to the boys.

This harper came from a great distance, from the mountains of Wales, to
contend with several other competitors for a prize, which had been
advertised by a musical society about a year before this time.  There was
to be a splendid ball given upon the occasion at Shrewsbury, which was
about five miles from our village.  The prize was ten guineas for the
best performer on the harp, and the prize was now to be decided in a few
days.

All this intelligence Barbara had long since gained from her maid, who
often paid visits to the town of Shrewsbury, and she had long had her
imagination inflamed with the idea of this splendid music-meeting and
ball.  Often had she sighed to be there, and often had she revolved in
her mind schemes for introducing herself to some GENTEEL neighbours, who
might take her to the ball IN THEIR CARRIAGE.  How rejoiced, how
triumphant was she, when this very evening, just about the time when the
butcher was bargaining with her father about Susan's lamb, a servant from
the Abbey rapped at the door, and left a card for Mr. and Miss Barbara
Case.

"There," cried Bab, "_I_ and PAPA are to dine and drink tea at The Abbey
tomorrow.  Who knows?  I daresay, when they see that I'm not a vulgar
person, and all that; and if I go cunningly to work with Miss Somers, as
I shall, to be sure, I daresay, she'll take me to the ball with her."

"To be sure," said the maid; "it's the least one may expect from a lady
who DEMEANS herself to visit Susan Price, and goes about a-shopping for
her.  The least she can do for you is to take you in her carriage, WHICH
costs nothing, but is just a common civility, to a ball."

"Then pray, Betty," continued Miss Barbara, "don't forget to-morrow, the
first thing you do, to send off to Shrewsbury for my new bonnet.  I must
have it to DINE IN, at the Abbey, or the ladies will think nothing of me;
and Betty, remember the mantua-maker too.  I must see and coax papa to
buy me a new gown against the ball.  I can see, you know, something of
the fashions to-morrow at the Abbey.  I shall LOOK THE LADIES WELL OVER,
I promise you.  And, Betty, I have thought of the most charming present
for Miss Somers, as papa says it's good never to go empty-handed to a
great house, I'll make Miss Somers, who is fond, as her maid told you, of
such things--I'll make Miss Somers a present of that guinea-hen of
Susan's; it's of no use to me, so do you carry it up early in the morning
to the Abbey, with my compliments.  That's the thing."

In full confidence that her present and her bonnet would operate
effectually in her favour, Miss Barbara paid her first visit at the
Abbey.  She expected to see wonders.  She was dressed in all the finery
which she had heard from her maid, who had heard from the 'prentice of a
Shrewsbury milliner, was THE THING in London; and she was much surprised
and disappointed, when she was shown into the room where the Miss
Somerses and the ladies of the Abbey were sitting, to see that they did
not, in any one part of their dress, agree with the picture her
imagination had formed of fashionable ladies.  She was embarrassed when
she saw books and work and drawings upon the table, and she began to
think that some affront was meant to her, because the COMPANY did not sit
with their hands before them.

When Miss Somers endeavoured to find out conversation that would interest
her, and spoke of walks and flowers and gardening, of which she was
herself fond, Miss Barbara still thought herself undervalued, and soon
contrived to expose her ignorance most completely, by talking of things
which she did not understand.

Those who never attempt to appear what they are not--those who do not in
their manners pretend to anything unsuited to their habits and situation
in life, never are in danger of being laughed at by sensible, well bred
people of any rank; but affectation is the constant and just object of
ridicule.

Miss Barbara Case, with her mistaken airs of gentility, aiming to be
thought a woman, and a fine lady, whilst she was, in reality, a child and
a vulgar attorney's daughter, rendered herself so thoroughly ridiculous,
that the good natured, yet discerning spectators were painfully divided
between their sense of comic absurdity and a feeling of shame for one who
could feel nothing for herself.

One by one the ladies dropped off.  Miss Somers went out of the room for
a few minutes to alter her dress, as it was the custom of the family,
before dinner.  She left a portfolio of pretty drawings and good prints,
for Miss Barbara's amusement; but Miss Barbara's thoughts were so intent
upon the harpers' ball, that she could not be entertained with such
TRIFLES.  How unhappy are those who spend their time in expectation!
They can never enjoy the present moment.  Whilst Barbara was contriving
means of interesting Miss Somers in her favour, she recollected, with
surprise, that not one word had yet been said of her present of the
guinea-hen.  Mrs. Betty, in the hurry of her dressing her young lady in
the morning, had forgotten it; but it came just whilst Miss Somers was
dressing; and the housekeeper came into her mistress' room to announce
its arrival.

"Ma'am," said she, "here's a beautiful guinea-hen just come, with Miss
Barbara Case's compliments to you."

Miss Somers knew, by the tone which the housekeeper delivered this
message, that there was something in the business which did not perfectly
please her.  She made no answer, in expectation that the housekeeper, who
was a woman of a very open temper, would explain her cause of
dissatisfaction.  In this she was not mistaken.  The housekeeper came
close up to the dressing table, and continued, "I never like to speak
till I'm sure, ma'am, and I'm not quite sure, to say certain, in this
case, ma'am, but still I think it right to tell you, which can't wrong
anybody, what came across my mind about this same guinea-hen, ma'am; and
you can inquire into it, and do as you please afterwards, ma'am.  Some
time ago we had fine guinea-fowls of our own, and I made bold, not
thinking, to be sure, that all our own would die away from us, as they
have done, to give a fine couple last Christmas to Susan Price, and very
fond and pleased she was at the time, and I'm sure would never have
parted with the hen with her good-will; but if my eyes don't strangely
mistake, this hen, that comes from Miss Barbara, is the selfsame
identical guinea-hen that I gave to Susan.  And how Miss Bab came by it
is the thing that puzzles me.  If my boy Philip was at home, maybe, as
he's often at Mrs. Price's (which I don't disapprove), he might know the
history of the guinea-hen.  I expect him home this night, and if you have
no objection, I will sift the affair."

"The shortest way, I think," said Henrietta, "would be to ask Miss Case
herself about it, which I will do this evening."

"If you please, ma'am," said the housekeeper, coldly; for she knew that
Miss Barbara was not famous in the village for speaking truth.

Dinner was now served.  Attorney Case expected to smell mint sauce, and,
as the covers were taken from off the dishes, looked around for lamb; but
no lamb appeared.  He had a dexterous knack of twisting the conversation
to his point.  Sir Arthur was speaking, when they sat down to dinner, of
a new carving knife, which he lately had had made for his sister.  The
attorney immediately went from carving-knives to poultry; thence to
butcher's meat.  Some joints, he observed, were much more difficult to
carve than others.  He never saw a man carve better than the gentleman
opposite him, who was the curate of the parish.  "But, sir," said the
vulgar attorney, "I must make bold to differ with you in one point, and
I'll appeal to Sir Arthur.  Sir Arthur, pray may I ask, when you carve a
forequarter of lamb, do you, when you raise the shoulder, throw in salt,
or not?"  This well prepared question was not lost upon Sir Arthur.  The
attorney was thanked for his intended present; but mortified and
surprised to hear Sir Arthur say that it was a constant rule of his never
to accept of any presents from his neighbours.  "If we were to accept a
lamb from a rich neighbour on my estate," said he, "I am afraid we should
mortify many of our poor tenants, who can have little to offer, though,
perhaps, they may bear us thorough good-will notwithstanding."

After the ladies left the dining-room, as they were walking up and down
the large hall, Miss Barbara had a fair opportunity of imitating her keen
father's method of conversing.  One of the ladies observed, that this
hall would be a charming place for music.  Bab brought in harps and
harpers, and the harpers' ball, in a breath.  "I know so much about it,--
about the ball I mean," said she, "because a lady in Shrewsbury, a friend
of papa's, offered to take me with her; but papa did not like to give her
the trouble of sending so far for me, though she has a coach of her own."
Barbara fixed her eyes upon Miss Somers as she spoke; but she could not
read her countenance as distinctly as she wished, because Miss Somers was
at this moment letting down the veil of her hat.

"Shall we walk out before tea?" said Miss Somers to her companions; "I
have a pretty guinea-hen to show you."  Barbara, secretly drawing
propitious omens from the guinea-hen, followed with a confidential step.
The pheasantry was well filled with pheasants, peacocks, etc., and
Susan's pretty little guinea-hen appeared well, even in this high
company.  It was much admired.  Barbara was in glory; but her glory was
of short duration.

Just as Miss Somers was going to inquire into the guinea-hen's history,
Philip came up, to ask permission to have a bit of sycamore, to turn a
nutmeg box for his mother.  He was an ingenious lad, and a good turner
for his age.  Sir Arthur had put by a bit of sycamore, on purpose for
him; and Miss Somers told him where it was to be found.  He thanked her:
but in the midst of his bow of thanks his eye was struck by the sight of
the guinea-hen, and he involuntarily exclaimed, "Susan's guinea-hen, I
declare!"  "No, it's not Susan's guinea-hen," said Miss Barbara,
colouring furiously; "it is mine, and I have made a present of it to Miss
Somers."

At the sound of Bab's voice, Philip turned--saw her--and indignation,
unrestrained by the presence of all the amazed spectators, flashed in his
countenance.

"What is the matter, Philip?" said Miss Somers, in a pacifying tone; but
Philip was not inclined to be pacified.  "Why, ma'am," said he, "may I
speak out?" and, without waiting for permission, he spoke out, and gave a
full, true, and warm account of Rose's embassy, and of Miss Barbara's
cruel and avaricious proceedings.

Barbara denied, prevaricated, stammered, and at last was overcome with
confusion; for which even the most indulgent spectators could scarcely
pity her.

Miss Somers, however, mindful of what was due to her guest, was anxious
to dispatch Philip for his piece of sycamore.  Bab recovered herself as
soon as he was out of sight; but she further exposed herself by
exclaiming, "I'm sure I wish this pitiful guinea-hen had never come into
my possession.  I wish Susan had kept it at home, as she should have
done!"

"Perhaps she will be more careful now that she has received so strong a
lesson," said Miss Somers.  "Shall we try her?" continued she.  "Philip
will, I daresay, take the guinea-hen back to Susan, if we desire it."

"If you please, ma'am," said Barbara, sullenly; "I have nothing more to
do with it."

So the guinea-hen was delivered to Philip, who set off joyfully with his
prize, and was soon in sight of Farmer Price's cottage.  He stopped when
he came to the door.  He recollected Rose and her generous friendship for
Susan.  He was determined that she should have the pleasure of restoring
the guinea-hen.  He ran into the village.  All the children who had given
up their little purse on May day were assembled on the play-green.  They
were delighted to see the guinea-hen once more.  Philip took his pipe and
tabor, and they marched in innocent triumph towards the whitewashed
cottage.

"Let me come with you--let me come with you," said the butcher's boy to
Philip.  "Stop one minute! my father has something to say to you."  He
darted into his father's house.  The little procession stopped, and in a
few minutes the bleating of a lamb was heard.  Through a back passage,
which led into the paddock behind the house, they saw the butcher leading
a lamb.

"It is Daisy!" exclaimed Rose--"It's Daisy!" repeated all her companions.
"Susan's lamb!  Susan's lamb!" and there was a universal shout of joy.

"Well, for my part," said the good butcher, as soon as he could be
heard,--"for my part, I would not be so cruel as Attorney Case for the
whole world.  These poor brute beasts don't know aforehand what's going
to happen to them; and as for dying, it's what we must all do some time
or another; but to keep wringing the hearts of the living, that have as
much sense as one's self, is what I call cruel; and is not this what
Attorney Case has been doing by poor Susan and her whole family, ever
since he took a spite against them?  But, at anyrate, here's Susan's lamb
safe and sound.  I'd have taken it back sooner, but I was off before day
to the fair, and am but just come back.  Daisy, however, has been as well
off in my paddock as he would have been in the field by the waterside."

The obliging shopkeeper, who showed the pretty calicoes to Susan, was now
at his door, and when he saw the lamb, and heard that it was Susan's, and
learned its history, he said that he would add his mite; and he gave the
children some ends of narrow riband, with which Rose decorated her
friend's lamb.

The pipe and tabor now once more began to play, and the procession moved
on in joyful order, after giving the humane butcher three cheers; three
cheers which were better deserved than "loud huzzas" usually are.

Susan was working in her arbour, with her little deal table before her.
When she heard the sound of the music, she put down her work and
listened.  She saw the crowd of children coming nearer and nearer.  They
had closed round Daisy, so that she did not see it; but as they came up
to the garden gate she saw that Rose beckoned to her.  Philip played as
loud as he could, that she might not hear, till the proper moment, the
bleating of the lamb.  Susan opened the garden-wicket, and at this signal
the crowd divided, and the first thing that Susan saw, in the midst of
her taller friends, was little smiling Mary, with the guinea-hen in her
arms.

"Come on!  Come on!" cried Mary, as Susan started with joyful surprise;
"you have more to see."

At this instant the music paused, Susan heard the bleating of a lamb, and
scarcely daring to believe her senses, she pressed eagerly forward, and
beheld poor Daisy!--she burst into tears.  "I did not shed one tear when
I parted with you, my dear little Daisy!" said she.  "It was for my
father and mother.  I would not have parted with you for anything else in
the whole world.  Thank you, thank you all," added she, to her
companions, who sympathized in her joy, even more than they had
sympathized in her sorrow.  "Now, if my father was not to go away from us
next week, and if my mother was quite stout, I should be the happiest
person in the world!"

As Susan pronounced these words, a voice behind the little listening
crowd cried, in a brutal tone, "Let us pass, if you please; you have no
right to stop up the public road!"  This was the voice of Attorney Case,
who was returning with his daughter Barbara from his visit to the Abbey.
He saw the lamb, and tried to whistle as he went on.  Barbara also saw
the guinea-hen, and turned her head another way, that she might avoid the
contemptuous, reproachful looks of those whom she only affected to
despise.  Even her new bonnet, in which she had expected to be so much
admired, was now only serviceable to hide her face and conceal her
mortification.

"I am glad she saw the guinea-hen," cried Rose, who now held it in her
hands.

"Yes," said Philip, "she'll not forget May day in a hurry."

"Nor I neither, I hope," said Susan, looking round upon her companions
with a most affectionate smile:  "I hope, whilst I live, I shall never
forget your goodness to me last May day.  Now I've my pretty guinea-hen
safe once more, I should think of returning your money."

"No! no! no!" was the general cry.  "We don't want the money--keep it,
keep it--you want it for your father."

"Well," said Susan, "I am not too proud to be obliged.  I WILL keep your
money for my father.  Perhaps some time or other I may be able to earn--"

"Oh," interrupted Philip, "don't let us talk of earning; don't let us
talk to her of money now; she has not had time hardly to look at poor
Daisy and her guinea-hen. Come, we must go about our business, and let
her have them all to herself."

The crowd moved away in consequence of Philip's considerate advice:  but
it was observed that he was the very last to stir from the garden-wicket
himself.  He stayed, first, to inform Susan that it was Rose who tied the
ribands on Daisy's head.  Then he stayed a little longer to let her into
the history of the guinea-hen, and to tell her who it was that brought
the hen home from the Abbey.

Rose held the sieve, and Susan was feeding her long lost favourite,
whilst Philip leaned over the wicket, prolonging his narration.  "Now, my
pretty guinea-hen," said Susan--"my naughty guinea-hen, that flew away
from me, you shall never serve me so again.  I must cut your nice wings;
but I won't hurt you."

"Take care," cried Philip; "you'd better, indeed you'd better let me hold
her whilst you cut her wings."

When this operation was successfully performed, which it certainly could
never have been if Philip had not held the hen for Susan, he recollected
that his mother had sent him with a message to Mrs. Price.  This message
led to another quarter of an hour's delay; for he had the whole history
of the guinea-hen to tell over again to Mrs. Price, and the farmer
himself luckily came in whilst it was going on, so it was but civil to
begin it afresh; and then the farmer was so rejoiced to see his Susan so
happy again with her two little favourites that he declared he must see
Daisy fed himself; and Philip found that he was wanted to hold the jug
full of milk, out of which Farmer Price filled the pan for Daisy?  Happy
Daisy! who lapped at his ease, whilst Susan caressed him, and thanked her
fond father and her pleased mother.

"But, Philip," said Mrs. Price, "I'll hold the jug--you'll be late with
your message to your mother; we'll not detain you any longer."

Philip departed, and as he went out of the garden-wicket, he looked up,
and saw Bab and her maid Betty staring out of the window, as usual.  On
this, he immediately turned back to try whether he had shut the gate
fast, lest the guinea-hen might stray out, and fall again into the hands
of the enemy.

Miss Barbara, in the course of this day, felt considerable mortification,
but no contrition.  She was vexed that her meanness was discovered, but
she felt no desire to cure herself of any of her faults.  The ball was
still uppermost in her vain, selfish soul. "Well," said she to her
confidante, Betty, "you hear how things have turned out; but if Miss
Somers won't think of asking me to go out with her, I've a notion I know
who will.  As papa says, it's a good thing to have two strings to one's
bow."

Now, some officers, who were quartered at Shrewsbury, had become
acquainted with Mr. Case.  They had gotten into some quarrel with a
tradesman of the town, and Attorney Case had promised to bring them
through the affair, as the man threatened to take the law of them.  Upon
the faith of this promise, and with the vain hope that, by civility, they
might dispose him to bring in a REASONABLE bill of costs, these officers
sometimes invited Mr. Case to the mess; and one of them, who had lately
been married, prevailed upon his bride SOMETIMES to take a little notice
of Miss Barbara.  It was with this lady that Miss Barbara now hoped to go
to the harpers' ball.

"The officers and Mrs. Strathspey, or, more properly, Mrs. Strathspey and
the officers, are to breakfast here, tomorrow, do you know," said Bab to
Betty.  "One of them dined at the Abbey, to-day, and told papa that
they'd all come.  They are going out on a party, somewhere into the
country, and breakfast here on their way.  Pray, Betty, don't forget that
Mrs. Strathspey can't breakfast without honey.  I heard her say so
myself."

"Then, indeed," said Betty, "I'm afraid Mrs. Strathspey will be likely to
go without her breakfast here; for not a spoonful of honey have we, let
her long for it ever so much."

"But, surely," said Bab, "we can contrive to get some honey in the
neighbourhood."

"There's none to be bought, as I know of," said Betty.

"But is there none to be begged or borrowed?" said Bab, laughing.  "Do
you forget Susan's beehive?  Step over to her in the morning with MY
COMPLIMENTS, and see what you can do.  Tell her it's for Mrs.
Strathspey."

In the morning Betty went with Miss Barbara's compliments to Susan, to
beg some honey for Mrs. Strathspey, who could not breakfast without it.
Susan did not like to part with her honey, because her mother loved it,
and she therefore gave Betty but a small quantity.  When Barbara saw how
little Susan sent, she called her A MISER, and she said she MUST have
some more for Mrs. Strathspey.  "I'll go myself and speak to her.  Come
with me, Betty," said the young lady, who found it at present convenient
to forget her having declared, the day that she sucked up the broth, that
she never would honour Susan with another visit.  "Susan," said she,
accosting the poor girl, whom she had done everything in her power to
injure, "I must beg a little more honey from you for Mrs. Strathspey's
breakfast.  You know, on a particular occasion such as this, neighbours
must help one another."

"To be sure they should," added Betty.

Susan, though she was generous, was not weak; she was willing to give to
those she loved, but not disposed to let anything be taken from her, or
coaxed out of her, by those she had reason to despise.  She civilly
answered, that she was sorry she had no more honey to spare.

Barbara grew angry, and lost all command of herself, when she saw that
Susan, without regarding her reproaches, went on looking through the
glass pane in the beehive.  "I'll tell you what, Susan Price," said she,
in a high tone, "the honey I WILL have, so you may as well give it to me
by fair means.  Yes or no!  Speak!  Will you give it me or not?  Will you
give me that piece of the honey-comb that lies there?"

"That bit of honey-comb is for my mother's breakfast," said Susan;  "I
cannot give it you."

"Can't you?" said Bab, "then see if I don't take it!"  She stretched
across Susan for the honey-comb, which was lying by some rosemary leaves
that Susan had freshly gathered for her mother's tea.  Bab grasped, but
at her first effort she only reached the rosemary.  She made a second
dart at the honey-comb, and, in her struggle to obtain it, she overset
the beehive.  The bees swarmed about her.  Her maid Betty screamed and
ran away.  Susan, who was sheltered by a laburnum tree, called to
Barbara, upon whom the black clusters of bees were now settling, and
begged her to stand still, and not to beat them away.  "If you stand
quietly you won't be stung, perhaps."  But instead of standing quietly,
Bab buffeted and stamped and roared, and the bees stung her terribly.
Her arms and her face swelled in a frightful manner.  She was helped home
by poor Susan and treacherous Mrs. Betty, who, now the mischief was done,
thought only of exculpating herself to her master.

"Indeed, Miss Barbara," said she, "this was quite wrong of you to go and
get yourself into such a scrape.  I shall be turned away for it, you'll
see."

"I don't care whether you are turned away or not," said Barbara; "I never
felt such pain in my life.  Can't you do something for me?  I don't mind
the pain either so much as being such a fright.  Pray, how am I to be fit
to be seen at breakfast by Mrs. Strathspey; and I suppose I can't go to
the ball either to-morrow, after all!"

"No, that you can't expect to do, indeed," said Betty, the comforter.
"You need not think of balls; for those lumps and swellings won't go off
your face this week.  That's not what pains me; but I'm thinking of what
your papa will say to me when he sees you, miss."

Whilst this amiable mistress and maid were in their adversity reviling
one another, Susan, when she saw that she could be of no further use, was
preparing to depart, but at the house-door, she was met by Mr. Case.  Mr.
Case had revolved things in his mind; for his second visit at the Abbey
pleased him as little as his first, owing to a few words which Sir Arthur
and Miss Somers dropped in speaking of Susan and Farmer Price.  Mr. Case
began to fear that he had mistaken his game in quarrelling with this
family.  The refusal of his present dwelt upon the attorney's mind; and
he was aware that, if the history of Susan's lamb ever reached the Abbey,
he was undone.  He now thought that the most prudent course he could
possibly follow would be to HUSH UP matters with the Prices with all
convenient speed.  Consequently, when he met Susan at his door, he forced
a gracious smile.  "How is your mother, Susan?" said he.  "Is there
anything in our house can be of service to her?"  On hearing his daughter
he cried out, "Barbara, Barbara--Bab! come downstairs, child, and speak
to Susan Price."  But as no Barbara answered, her father stalked upstairs
directly, opened the door, and stood amazed at the spectacle of her
swelled visage.

Betty instantly began to tell the story of Barbara's mishap her own way.
Bab contradicted her as fast as she spoke.  The attorney turned the maid
away on the spot; and partly with real anger, and partly with feigned
affectation of anger, he demanded from his daughter how she dared to
treat Susan Price so ill, "when," as he said, "she was so neighbourly and
obliging as to give you some of her honey?  Couldn't you be content,
without seizing upon the honey-comb by force?  This is scandalous
behaviour, and what, I assure you, I can't countenance."

Susan now interceded for Barbara; and the attorney, softening his voice,
said that "Susan was a great deal too good to her; as you are, indeed,"
added he, "to everybody.  I forgive her for your sake."  Susan curtsied,
in great surprise; but her lamb could not be forgotten, and she left the
attorney's house as soon as she could, to make her mother's rosemary tea
breakfast.

Mr. Case saw that Susan was not so simple as to be taken in by a few fair
words.  His next attempt was to conciliate Farmer Price.  The farmer was
a blunt, honest man, and his countenance remained inflexibly
