
Rosamond, laughing:  "Now you are making a joke of me, papa, I see; but I
thought you liked that people should be generous,--my godmother said that
she did."

"So do I, full as well as your godmother; but we have not yet quite
settled what it is to be generous."

"Why is it not generous to make presents?" said Rosamond.

"That is the question which it would take up a great deal of time to
answer.  But, for instance, to make a present of a thing that you know
can be of no use to a person you neither love nor esteem, because it is
her birthday, and because everybody gives her something, and because she
expects something, and because your godmother says she likes that people
should be generous, seems to me, my dear Rosamond, to be, since I must
say it, rather more like folly than generosity."

Rosamond looked down upon the basket, and was silent.  "Then I am a fool,
am I?" said she looking up at last.

"Because you have made ONE mistake?  No. If you have sense enough to see
your own mistakes, and can afterwards avoid them, you will never be a
fool."

Here the carriage stopped, and Rosamond recollected that the basket was
uncovered.

Now we must observe, that Rosamond's father had not been too severe upon
Bell when he called her a silly girl.  From her infancy she had been
humoured; and at eight years old she had the misfortune to be a spoiled
child.  She was idle, fretful, and selfish; so that nothing could make
her happy.  On her birthday she expected, however, to be perfectly happy.
Everybody in the house tried to please her, and they succeeded so well,
that between breakfast and dinner she had only six fits of crying.  The
cause of five of these fits no one could discover:  but the last, and
most lamentable, was occasioned by a disappointment about a worked muslin
frock; and accordingly, at dressing time, her maid brought it to her,
exclaiming, "See here, miss, what your mamma has sent you on your
birthday.  Here's a frock fit for a queen--if it had but lace round the
cuffs."

"And why has not it lace around the cuffs? mamma said it should."

"Yes, but mistress was disappointed about the lace; it is not come home."

"Not come home, indeed! and didn't they know it was my birthday?  But
then I say I won't wear it without the lace--I can't wear it without the
lace, and I won't."

The lace, however, could not be had; and Bell at length submitted to let
the frock be put on.

"Come, Miss Bell, dry your eyes," said the maid who educated her; "dry
your eyes, and I'll tell you something that will please you."

"What, then?" said the child, pouting and sobbing.

"Why--but you must not tell that I told you."

"No,--but if I am asked?"

"Why, if you are asked, you must tell the truth, to be sure.  So I'll
hold my tongue, miss."

"Nay, tell me, though, and I'll never tell--if I AM asked."

"Well, then," said the maid, "your cousin Rosamond is come, and has
brought you the most BEAUTIFULLEST thing you ever saw in your life; but
you are not to know anything about it till after dinner, because she
wants to surprise you; and mistress has put it into her wardrobe till
after dinner."

"Till after dinner!" repeated Bell, impatiently; "I can't wait till then;
I must see it this minute."  The maid refused her several times, till
Bell burst into another fit of crying, and the maid, fearing that her
mistress would be angry with HER, if Bell's eyes were red at dinner time,
consented to show her the basket.

"How pretty!--but let me have it in my own hands," said Bell, as the maid
held the basket up out of her reach.

"Oh, no, you must not touch it; for if you should spoil it, what would
become of me?"

"Become of you, indeed!" exclaimed the spoiled child, who never
considered anything but her own immediate gratification--"Become of YOU,
indeed! what signifies that--I sha'n't spoil it; and I will have it in my
own hands.  If you don't hold it down for me directly, I'll tell that you
showed it to me."

"Then you won't snatch it?"

"No, no, I won't indeed," said Bell; but she had learned from her maid a
total disregard of truth.  She snatched the basket the moment it was
within her reach.  A struggle ensued, in which the handle and lid were
torn off, and one of the medallions crushed inwards, before the little
fury returned to her senses.

Calmed at this sight, the next question was, how she should conceal the
mischief which she had done.  After many attempts, the handle and lid
were replaced; the basket was put exactly in the same spot in which it
had stood before, and the maid charged the child, "TO LOOK AS IF NOTHING
WAS THE MATTER."

We hope that both children and parents will here pause for a moment to
reflect.  The habits of tyranny, meanness, and falsehood, which children
acquire from living with bad servants, are scarcely ever conquered in the
whole course of their future lives.

After shutting up the basket they left the room, and in the adjoining
passage they found a poor girl waiting with a small parcel in her hand.
"What's your business?" said the maid.

"I have brought home the lace, madam, that was bespoke for the young
lady."

"Oh, you have, have you, at last?" said Bell; "and pray why didn't you
bring it sooner?"  The girl was going to answer, but the maid interrupted
her, saying--"Come, come, none of your excuses; you are a little idle,
good-for-nothing thing, to disappoint Miss Bell upon her birthday.  But
now you have brought it, let us look at it!"

The little girl gave the lace without reply, and the maid desired her to
go about her business, and not to expect to be paid; for that her
mistress could not see anybody, BECAUSE she was in a room full of
company.

"May I call again, madam, this afternoon?" said the child, timidly.

"Lord bless my stars!" replied the maid, "what makes people so poor, I
WONDERS!  I wish mistress would buy her lace at the warehouse, as I told
her, and not of these folks.  Call again! yes, to be sure.  I believe
you'd call, call, call twenty times for twopence."

However ungraciously the permission to call again was granted, it was
received with gratitude.  The little girl departed with a cheerful
countenance; and Bell teazed her maid till she got her to sew the long
wished-for lace upon her cuffs.

Unfortunate Bell!--All dinner time passed, and people were so hungry, so
busy, or so stupid, that not an eye observed her favourite piece of
finery.  Till at length she was no longer able to conceal her impatience,
and turning to Laura, who sat next to her, she said, "You have no lace
upon your cuffs.  Look how beautiful mine is!--is not it?  Don't you wish
your mamma could afford to give some like it?  But you can't get any if
she would, for this was made on purpose for me on my birthday, and nobody
can get a bit more anywhere, if they would give the world for it."

"But cannot the person who made it," said Laura, "make any more like it?"

"No, no, no!" cried Bell; for she had already learned, either from her
maid or her mother, the mean pride which values things not for being
really pretty or useful, but for being such as nobody else can procure.
"Nobody can get any like it, I say," repeated Bell; "nobody in all London
can make it but one person, and that person will never make a bit for
anybody but me, I am sure.  Mamma won't let her, if I ask her not."

"Very well," said Laura, coolly, "I do not want any of it; you need not
be so violent:  I assure you that I don't want any of it."

"Yes, but you do, though," said Bell, more angrily.

"No, indeed," said Laura, smiling.

"You do, in the bottom of your heart; but you say you don't to plague me,
I know," cried Bell, swelling with disappointed vanity.  "It is pretty
for all that, and it cost a great deal of money too, and nobody shall
have any like it, if they cried their eyes out."

Laura received this declaration in silence--Rosamond smiled; and at her
smile the ill-suppressed rage of the spoiled child burst forth into the
seventh and loudest fit of crying which had yet been heard on her
birthday.

"What's the matter, my pet?" cried her mother; "come to me, and tell me
what's the matter."  Bell ran roaring to her mother; but no otherwise
explained the cause of her sorrow than by tearing the fine lace with
frantic gestures from her cuffs, and throwing the fragments into her
mother's lap.  "Oh! the lace, child!--are you mad?" said her mother,
catching hold of both her hands.  "Your beautiful lace, my dear love--do
you know how much it cost?"

"I don't care how much it cost--it is not beautiful, and I'll have none
of it," replied Bell, sobbing; "for it is not beautiful."

"But it is beautiful," retorted her mother; "I chose the pattern myself.
Who has put it into your head, child, to dislike it?  Was it Nancy?"

"No, not Nancy, but THEM, mamma," said Bell, pointing to Laura and
Rosamond.

"Oh, fie! don't POINT," said her mother, putting down her stubborn
finger; "nor say THEM, like Nancy; I am sure you misunderstood.  Miss
Laura, I am sure, did not mean any such thing."

"No, madam; and I did not say any such thing, that I recollect," said
Laura, gently.  "Oh, no, indeed!" cried Rosamond, warmly, rising in her
sister's defence.

No defence or explanation, however, was to be heard, for everybody had
now gathered round Bell, to dry her tears, and to comfort her for the
mischief she had done to her own cuffs.  They succeeded so well, that in
about a quarter of an hour the young lady's eyes, and the reddened arches
over her eyebrows came to their natural colour; and the business being
thus happily hushed up, the mother, as a reward to her daughter for her
good humour, begged that Rosamond would now be so good as to produce her
"charming present."

Rosamond, followed by all the company, amongst whom, to her great joy,
was her godmother, proceeded to the dressing room.  "Now I am sure,"
thought she, "Bell will be surprised, and my godmother will see she was
right about my generosity."

The doors of the wardrobe were opened with due ceremony, and the filigree
basket appeared in all its glory.  "Well, this is a charming present,
indeed!" said the godmother, who was one of the company; "MY Rosamond
knows how to make presents."  And as she spoke, she took hold of the
basket, to lift it down to the admiring audience.  Scarcely had she
touched it, when, lo! the basket fell to the ground, and only the handle
remained in her hand.  All eyes were fixed upon the wreck.  Exclamations
of sorrow were heard in various tones; and "Who can have done this?" was
all that Rosamond could say.  Bell stood in sullen silence, which she
obstinately preserved in the midst of the inquiries that were made about
the disaster.

At length the servants were summoned, and amongst them, Nancy, Miss
Bell's maid and governess.  She affected much surprise when she saw what
had befallen the basket, and declared that she knew nothing of the
matter, but that she had seen her mistress in the morning put it quite
safe into the wardrobe; and that, for her part, she had never touched it,
or thought of touching it, in her born days.  "Nor Miss Bell, neither,
ma'am,--I can answer for her; for she never knew of its being there,
because I never so much as mentioned it to her, that there was such a
thing in the house, because I knew Miss Rosamond wanted to surprise her
with the secret; so I never mentioned a sentence of it--did I, Miss
Bell?"

Bell, putting on the deceitful look which her maid had taught her,
answered boldly, "NO;" but she had hold of Rosamond's hand, and at the
instant she uttered this falsehood she squeezed it terribly.  "Why do you
squeeze my hand so?" said Rosamond, in a low voice; "what are you afraid
of?"

"Afraid of!" cried Bell, turning angrily; "I'm not afraid of anything,--
I've nothing to be afraid about."

"Nay, I did not say you had," whispered Rosamond; "but only if you did by
accident--you know what I mean--I should not be angry if you did--only
say so."

"I say I did not!" cried Bell, furiously; "Mamma, mamma!  Nancy! my
cousin Rosamond won't believe me!  That's very hard.  It's very rude, and
I won't bear it--I won't."

"Don't be angry, love.  Don't," said the maid.

"Nobody suspects you, darling," said her mother; "but she has too much
sensibility.  Don't cry, love; nobody suspected you.  But you know,"
continued she, turning to the maid, "somebody must have done this, and I
must know how it was done.  Miss Rosamond's charming present must not be
spoiled in this way, in my house, without my taking proper notice of it.
I assure you I am very angry about it, Rosamond."

Rosamond did not rejoice in her anger, and had nearly made a sad mistake
by speaking aloud her thoughts--"I WAS VERY FOOLISH--" she began and
stopped.

"Ma'am," cried the maid, suddenly, "I'll venture to say I know who did
it."

"Who?" said everyone, eagerly.  "Who?" said Bell, trembling."

"Why, miss, don't you recollect that little girl with the lace, that we
saw peeping about in the passage?  I'm sure she must have done it; for
here she was by herself half an hour or more, and not another creature
has been in mistress' dressing-room, to my certain knowledge, since
morning.  Those sort of people have so much curiosity.  I'm sure she must
have been meddling with it," added the maid.

"Oh, yes, that's the thing," said the mistress, decidedly.  "Well, Miss
Rosamond, for your comfort she shall never come into my house again."

"Oh, that would not comfort me at all," said Rosamond; "besides, we are
not sure that she did it, and if--"  A single knock at the door was heard
at this instant.  It was the little girl, who came to be paid for her
lace.

"Call her in," said the lady of the house; "let us see her directly."

The maid, who was afraid that the girl's innocence would appear if she
were produced, hesitated; but upon her mistress repeating her commands,
she was forced to obey.  The girl came in with a look of simplicity; but
when she saw a room full of company she was a little abashed.  Rosamond
and Laura looked at her and one another with surprise, for it was the
same little girl whom they had seen weaving lace.

"Is not it she?" whispered Rosamond to her sister.

"Yes, it is; but hush," said Laura, "she does not know us.  Don't say a
word, let us hear what she will say."

Laura got behind the rest of the company as she spoke, so that the little
girl could not see her.

"Vastly well!" said Bell's mother; "I am waiting to see how long you will
have the assurance to stand there with that innocent look.  Did you ever
see that basket before?"

"Yes, ma'am," said the girl.

"YES, MA'AM!" cried the maid; "and what else do you know about it?  You
had better confess it at once, and mistress, perhaps, will say no more
about it."

"Yes, do confess it," added Bell, earnestly.

"Confess what, madam?" said the little girl; "I never touched the basket,
madam."

"You never TOUCHED it; but you confess," interrupted Bell's mother, "that
you DID SEE it before.  And, pray, how came you to see it?  You must have
opened my wardrobe."

"No, indeed, ma'am," said the little girl; "but I was waiting in the
passage, ma'am, and this door was partly open; and looking at the maid,
you know, I could not help seeing it."

"Why, how could you see through the doors of my wardrobe?" rejoined the
lady.

The maid, frightened, pulled the little girl by the sleeve.

"Answer me," said the lady, "where did you see this basket?"  Another
stronger pull.

"I saw it, madam, in her hands," looking at the maid; "and--"

"Well, and what became of it afterwards?"

"Ma'am"--hesitating--"miss pulled, and by accident--I believe, I saw,
ma'am--miss, you know what I saw."

"I do not know--I do not know; and if I did, you had no business there;
and mamma won't believe you, I am sure."  Everybody else, however, did
believe; and their eyes were fixed upon Bell in a manner which made her
feel rather ashamed.

"What do you all look at me so for?  Why do you all look so?  And am I to
be put to shame on my birthday?" cried she, bursting into a roar of
passion; "and all for this nasty thing!" added she, pushing away the
remains of the basket, and looking angrily at Rosamond.

"Bell!  Bell!  O, fie! fie!--Now I am ashamed of you; that's quite rude
to your cousin," said her mother, who was more shocked at her daughter's
want of politeness than at her falsehood.  "Take her away, Nancy, till
she has done crying," added she to the maid, who accordingly carried off
her pupil.

Rosamond, during this scene, especially at the moment when her present
was pushed away with such disdain, had been making reflections upon the
nature of true generosity.  A smile from her father, who stood by, a
silent spectator of the catastrophe of the filigree basket, gave rise to
these reflections; nor were they entirely dissipated by the condolence of
the rest of the company, nor even by the praises of her godmother, who,
for the purpose of condoling with her, said, "Well, my dear Rosamond, I
admire your generous spirit.  You know I prophesied that your half-guinea
would be gone the soonest.  Did I not, Laura?" said she, appealing, in a
sarcastic tone, to where she thought Laura was.  "Where is Laura?  I
don't see her."  Laura came forward.  "You are too PRUDENT to throw away
your money like your sister.  Your half-guinea, I'll answer for it, is
snug in your pocket--Is it not?"

"No, madam," answered she, in a low voice.

But low as the voice of Laura was, the poor little lace-girl heard it;
and now, for the first time, fixing her eyes upon Laura, recollected her
benefactress.  "Oh, that's the young lady!" she exclaimed, in a tone of
joyful gratitude, "the good, good young lady, who gave me the half-
guinea, and would not stay to be thanked for it; but I WILL thank her
now."

"The half-guinea, Laura!" said her godmother.  "What is all this?"

"I'll tell you, madam, if you please," said the little girl.

It was not in expectation of being praised for it, that Laura had been
generous, and therefore everybody was really touched with the history of
the weaving-pillow; and whilst they praised, felt a certain degree of
respect, which is not always felt by those who pour forth eulogiums.
RESPECT is not an improper word, even applied to a child of Laura's age;
for let the age or situation of the person be what it may, they command
respect who deserve it.

"Ah, madam!" said Rosamond to her godmother, "now you see--you see she is
NOT a little miser.  I'm sure that's better than wasting half a guinea
upon a filigree basket; is it not, ma'am?" said she, with an eagerness
which showed that she had forgotten all her own misfortunes in sympathy
with her sister.  "This is being REALLY GENEROUS, father, is it not?"

"Yes, Rosamond," said her father, and he kissed her; "this IS being
really generous.  It is not only by giving away money that we can show
generosity; it is by giving up to others anything that we like ourselves:
and therefore," added he, smiling, "it is really generous of you to give
your sister the thing you like best of all others."

"The thing I like the best of all others, father," said Rosamond, half
pleased, half vexed.  "What is that, I wonder?  You don't mean PRAISE, do
you, sir?"

"Nay, you must decide that yourself, Rosamond."

"Why, sir," said she, ingenuously, "perhaps it WAS ONCE the thing I liked
best; but the pleasure I have just felt makes me like something else much
better."



ETON MONTEM.

[Extracted from the "Courier" of May, 1799.]

"Yesterday this triennial ceremony took place, with which the public are
too well acquainted to require a particular description.  A collection,
called Salt, is taken from the public, which forms a purse, to support
the Captain of the School in his studies at Cambridge.  This collection
is made by the Scholars, dressed in fancy dresses, all round the country.

"At eleven o'clock, the youths being assembled in their habiliments at
the College, the Royal Family set off from the Castle to see them, and,
after walking round the Courtyard, they proceeded to Salt Hill in the
following order:--

"His Majesty, his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, and the Earl of
Uxbridge.

"Their Royal Highnesses the Dukes of Kent and Cumberland, Earl Morton,
and General Gwynne, all on horseback, dressed in the Windsor uniform,
except the Prince of Wales, who wore a suit of dark blue, and a brown
surtout over.

"Then followed the Scholars, preceded by the Marechal Serjeant, the
Musicians of the Staffordshire Band, and Mr. Ford, Captain of the
Seminary, the Serjeant Major, Serjeants, Colonels, Corporals, Musicians,
Ensign, Lieutenant, Steward, Salt Bearers, Polemen, and Runners.

"The cavalcade was brought up by her Majesty and her amiable daughters in
two carriages, and a numerous company of equestrians and pedestrians, all
eager to behold their Sovereign and his family.  Among the former, Lady
Lade was foremost in the throng; only two others dared venture their
persons on horseback in such a multitude.

"The King and Royal Family were stopped on Eton Bridge by Messrs. Young
and Mansfield, the Salt Bearers, to whom their Majesties delivered their
customary donation of fifty guineas each.

"At Salt Hill, his Majesty, with his usual affability, took upon himself
to arrange the procession round the Royal carriages; and even when the
horses were taken off, with the assistance of the Duke of Kent, fastened
the traces round the pole of the coaches, to prevent any inconvenience.

"An exceeding heavy shower of rain coming on, the Prince took leave, and
went to the 'Windmill Inn,' till it subsided.  The King and his
attendants weathered it out in their great-coats.

"After the young gentlemen walked round the carriage, Ensign Vince and
the Salt Bearers proceeded to the summit of the hill; but the wind being
boisterous, he could not exhibit his dexterity in displaying his flag,
and the space being too small before the carriages, from the concourse of
spectators, the King kindly acquiesced in not having it displayed under
such inconvenience.

"Their Majesties and the Princesses then returned home, the King
occasionally stopping to converse with the Dean of Windsor, the Earl of
Harrington, and other noblemen.

"The Scholars partook of an elegant dinner at the 'Windmill Inn,' and in
the evening walked on Windsor Terrace.

"Their Royal Highnesses the Prince of Wales and Duke of Cumberland, after
taking leave of their Majesties, set off for town, and honoured the Opera
House with their presence in the evening.

"The profit arising from the Salt collected, according to account,
amounted to 8OO pounds.

"The Stadtholder, the Duke of Gordon, Lord and Lady Melbourne, Viscount
Brome, and a numerous train of fashionable nobility, were present.

"The following is an account of their dresses, made as usual, very
handsomely, by Mrs. Snow, milliner, of Windsor:--

"Mr. Ford, Captain, with eight Gentlemen to attend him as servitors.
"Mr. Sarjeant, Marechal.
"Mr. Bradith, Colonel.
"Mr. Plumtree, Lieutenant.
"Mr. Vince, Ensign.
"Mr. Young, College Salt Bearer; white and gold dress, rich satin bag,
covered with gold netting.
"Mr. Mansfield, Oppidan, white, purple, and orange dress, trimmed with
silver; rich satin bag, purple and silver:  each carrying elegant poles,
with gold and silver cord.
"Mr. Keity, yellow and black velvet; helmet trimmed with silver.
"Mr. Bartelot, plain mantle and sandals, Scotch bonnet, a very Douglas.
"Mr. Knapp, flesh-colour and blue; Spanish hat and feathers.
"Mr. Ripley, rose-colour; helmet.
"Mr. Islip (being in mourning), a scarf; helmet, black velvet; and white
satin.
"Mr. Tomkins, violet and silver; helmet.
"Mr. Thackery, lilac and silver; Roman Cap.
"Mr. Drury, mazarin blue; fancy cap.
"Mr. Davis, slate-colour and straw.
"Mr. Routh, pink and silver, Spanish hat.
"Mr. Curtis, purple, fancy cap.
"Mr. Lloyd, blue; ditto.

"At the conclusion of the ceremony the Royal Family returned to Windsor,
and the boys were all sumptuously entertained at the tavern at Salt Hill.
About six in the evening all the boys returned in the order of
procession, and, marching round the great square of Eton, were dismissed.
The captain then paid his respects to the Royal Family, at the Queen's
Lodge, Windsor, previously to his departure for King's College,
Cambridge, to defray which expense the produce of the Montem was
presented to him.

"The day concluded by a brilliant promenade of beauty, rank, and fashion,
on Windsor Terrace, enlivened by the performance of several bands of
music.

"The origin of the procession is from the custom by which the Manor was
held.

"The custom of hunting the Ram belonged to Eton College, as well as the
custom of Salt; but it was discontinued by Dr. Cook, late Dean of Ely.
Now this custom we know to have been entered on the register of the Royal
Abbey of Bec, in Normandy, as one belonging to the Manor of East or Great
Wrotham, in Norfolk, given by Ralph de Toni to the Abbey of Bec, and was
as follows:--When the harvest was finished the tenants were to have half
an acre of barley, and a ram let loose; and if they caught him he was
their own to make merry with; but if he escaped from them he was the
Lord's.  The Etonians, in order to secure the ram, houghed him in the
Irish fashion, and then attacked him with great clubs.  The cruelty of
this proceeding brought it into disuse, and now it exists no longer.--See
Register of the Royal Abbey of Bec, folio 58.

"After the dissolution of the alien priories, in 1414, by the Parliament
of Leicester, they remained in the Crown till Henry VI., who gave Wrotham
Manor to Eton College; and if the Eton Fellows would search, they would
perhaps find the Manor in their possession, that was held by the custom
of Salt."

MEN.

Alderman Bursal, Father of young Bursal.

Lord John,      )
Talbot,         )
Wheeler,        ) Young Gentlemen of Eton, from 17 to 19 years of age.
Bursal,         )
Rory O'Ryan     )

Mr. Newington, Landlord of the Inn at Salt Hill.
Farmer Hearty.
A Waiter and crowd of Eton Lads.

WOMEN.

The Marchioness of Piercefield, Mother of Lord John.
Lady Violetta--her Daughter, a Child of six or seven years old.
Mrs. Talbot.
Lousia Talbot, her Daughter.
Miss Bursal, Daughter to the Alderman.
Mrs. Newington, Landlady of the Inn at Salt Hill.
Sally, a Chambermaid.
Patty, a Country Girl.

                 Pipe and Tabor, and Dance of Peasants.



SCENE I.

          The Bar of the "Windmill Inn" at Salt Hill.

          MR. and MRS. NEWINGTON, the Landlord and Landlady.

Landlady.  'Tis an unpossibility, Mr. Newington; and that's enough.  Say
no more about it; 'tis an unpossibility in the natur of things.  (She
ranges jellies, etc., in the Bar.)  And pray, do you take your great old
fashioned tankard, Mr. Newington, from among my jellies and
confectioneries.

Landlord (takes his tankard and drinks).  Anything for a quiet life.  If
it is an impossibility, I've no more to say; only, for the soul of me, I
can't see the great unpossibility, wife.

Landlady.  Wife, indeed!--wife!--wife! wife every minute.

Landlord.  Heyday!  Why, what a plague would you have me call you?  The
other day you quarrelled with me for calling you Mrs. Landlady.

Landlady.  To be sure I did, and very proper in me I should.  I've turned
off three waiters and five chambermaids already, for screaming after me
Mrs. Landlady! Mrs. Landlady!  But 'tis all your ill manners.

Landlord.  Ill manners!  Why, if I may be so bold, if you are not Mrs.
Landlady, in the name of wonder what are you?

Landlady.  Mrs. Newington, Mr. Newington.

Landlord (drinks).  Mrs. Newington, Mr. Newington drinks your health; for
I suppose I must not be landlord any more in my own house (shrugs).

Landlady.  Oh, as to that, I have no objections nor impediments to your
being called LANDLORD.  You look it, and become it very proper.

Landlord.  Why, yes, indeed, thank my tankard, I do look it, and become
it, and am nowise ashamed of it; but everyone to their mind, as you,
wife, don't fancy the being called Mrs. Landlady.

Landlady.  To be sure I don't.  Why, when folks hear the old fashioned
cry of Mrs. Landlady! Mrs. Landlady! who do they expect, think you, to
see, but an overgrown, fat, featherbed of a woman, coming waddling along
with her thumbs sticking on each side of her apron, o' this fashion?
Now, to see me coming, nobody would take me to be a landlady.

Landlord.  Very true, indeed, wife--Mrs. Newington, I mean--I ask pardon;
but now to go on with what we were saying about the unpossibility of
letting that old lady, and the civil-spoken young lady there above, have
them there rooms for another day.

Landlady.  Now, Mr. Newington, let me hear no more about that old
gentlewoman, and that civil-spoken young lady.  Fair words cost nothing;
and I've a notion that's the cause they are so plenty with the young
lady.  Neither o' them, I take it, by what they've ordered since their
coming into the house, are such grand folk, that one need be so
petticular about them.

Landlord.  Why, they came only in a chaise and pair, to be sure; I can't
deny that.

Landlady.  But, bless my stars! what signifies talking?  Don't you know,
as well as I do, Mr. Newington, that to-morrow is Eton Montem, and that
if we had twenty times as many rooms and as many more to the back of
them, it would not be one too many for all the company we've a right to
expect, and those the highest quality of the land?  Nay, what do I talk
of to-morrow? isn't my Lady Piercefield and suite expected? and,
moreover, Mr. and Miss Bursal's to be here, and will call for as much in
an hour as your civil-spoken young lady in a twelvemonth, I reckon.  So,
Mr. Newington, if you don't think proper to go up and inform the ladies
above, that the Dolphin rooms are not for them, I must SPEAK myself,
though 'tis a thing I never do when I can help it.

Landlord (aside).  She not like to speak!  (Aloud.)  My dear, you can
speak a power better than I can; so take it all upon yourself, if you
please; for, old-fashioned as I and my tankard here be, I can't make a
speech that borders on the uncivil order, to a lady like, for the life
and lungs of me.  So, in the name of goodness, do you go up, Mrs.
Newington.

Landlady.  And so I will, Mr. Newington.  Help ye!  Civilities and
rarities are out o' season for them that can't pay for them in this
world; and very proper.  [Exit Landlady.]

Landlord.  And very proper!  Ha! who comes yonder?  The Eton chap who
wheedled me into lending him my best hunter last year, and was the
ruination of him; but that must be paid for, wheedle or no wheedle; and,
for the matter of wheedling, I'd stake this here Mr. Wheeler, that is
making up to me, do you see, against e'er a boy, or hobbledehoy, in all
Eton, London, or Christendom, let the other be who he will.

                  Enter WHEELER.

Wheeler.  A fine day, Mr. Newington.

Landlord.  A fine day, Mr. Wheeler.

Wheel.  And I hope, for YOUR sake, we may have as fine a day for the
Montem to-morrow.  It will be a pretty penny in your pocket!  Why, all
the world will be here; and (looking round at the jellies, etc.) so much
the better for them; for here are good things enough, and enough for
them.  And here's the best thing of all, the good old tankard still; not
empty, I hope.

Landlord.  Not empty, I hope.  Here's to you, Mr. Wheeler.

Wheel.  Mr. Wheeler!--CAPTAIN Wheeler, if you please.

Landlord.  YOU, Captain Wheeler!  Why, I thought in former times it was
always the oldest scholar at Eton that was Captain at the Montems; and
didn't Mr. Talbot come afore you?

Wheel.  Not at all; we came on the same day.  Some say I came first; some
say Talbot.  So the choice of which of us is to be captain is to be put
to the vote amongst the lads--most votes carry it; and I have most votes,
I fancy; so I shall be captain, to-morrow, and a pretty deal of salt* I
reckon I shall pocket.  Why, the collection at the last Montem, they say,
came to a plump thousand!  No bad thing for a young fellow to set out
with for Oxford or Cambridge--hey?

*Salt, the cant name given by the Eton lads to the money collected at
Montem.

Landlord.  And no bad thing, before he sets out for Cambridge or Oxford,
'twould be for a young gentleman to pay his debts.

Wheel.  Debts!  Oh, time enough for that.  I've a little account with you
in horses, I know; but that's between you and me, you know--mum.

Landlord.  Mum me no mums, Mr. Wheeler.  Between you and me, my best
hunter has been ruinationed; and I can't afford to be mum.  So you'll
take no offence if I speak; and as you'll set off to-morrow, as soon as
the Montem's over, you'll be pleased to settle with me some way or other
to-day, as we've no other time.

Wheel.  No time so proper, certainly.  Where's the little account?--I
have money sent me for my Montem dress, and I can squeeze that much out
of it.  I came home from Eton on purpose to settle with you.  But as to
the hunter, you must call upon Talbot--do you understand? to pay for him;
for though Talbot and I had him the same day, 'twas Talbot did for him,
and Talbot must pay.  I spoke to him about it, and charged him to
remember you; for I never forget to speak a good word for my friends.

Landlord.  So I perceive.

Wheel.  I'll make bold just to give you my opinion of these jellies
whilst you are getting my account, Mr. Newington.

         (He swallows down a jelly or two--Landlord is going.)

                        Enter TALBOT.

Talbot.  Hallo, Landlord! where are making off so fast?  Here, your
jellies are all going as fast as yourself.

Wheel. (aside).  Talbot!--I wish I was a hundred miles off.

Landlord.  You are heartily welcome, Mr. Talbot.  A good morning to you,
sir; I'm glad to see you--very glad to see you, Mr. Talbot.

Talb.  Then shake hands, my honest landlord.

(Talbot, in shaking hands with him, puts a purse into the landlord's
hands.)

Landlord.  What's here?  Guineas?

Talb.  The hunter, you know; since Wheeler won't pay, I must--that's all.
Good morning.

Wheel.  (aside).  What a fool!

          (Landlord, as Talbot is going, catches hold of his coat.)

Landlord.  Hold, Mr. Talbot, this won't do!

Talb.  Won't it?  Well, then, my watch must go.

Landlord.  Nay, nay! but you are in such a hurry to pay--you won't hear a
man.  Half this is enough for your share o' the mischief, in all
conscience.  Mr. Wheeler, there, had the horse on the same day.

Wheel.  But Bursal's my witness--

Talb.  Oh, say no more about witnesses; a man's conscience is always his
best witness, or his worst.  Landlord, take your money, and no more
words.

Wheel.  This is very genteel of you, Talbot.  I always thought you would
do the genteel thing as I knew you to be so generous and considerate.

Talb.  Don't waste your fine speeches, Wheeler, I advise you, this
election time.  Keep them for Bursal or Lord John, or some of those who
like them.  They won't go down with me.  Good morning to you.  I give you
notice, I'm going back to Eton as fast as I can gallop; and who knows
what plain speaking may do with the Eton lads?  I may be captain yet,
Wheeler.  Have a care!  Is my horse ready there?

Landlord.  Mr. Talbot's horse, there!  Mr. Talbot's horse, I say.

                           Talbot sings.

     "He carries weight--he rides a race--
      'Tis for a thousand pound!"                 (Exit Talbot.)

Wheel.  And, dear me! I shall be left behind.  A horse for me, pray; a
horse for Mr. Wheeler!                            (Exit Wheeler.)

Landlord (calls very loud).  Mr. Talbot's horse!  Hang the hostler!  I'll
saddle him myself.                           (Exit Landlord.)



SCENE II.

                A Dining room in the Inn at Salt Hill.

                     MRS. TALBOT and LOUISA.

Louisa (laughing).  With what an air Mrs. Landlady made her exit!

Mrs. Talbot.  When I was young, they say, I was proud; but I am humble
enough now:  these petty mortifications do not vex me.

Louisa.  It is well my brother was gone before Mrs. Landlady made her
entree; for if he had heard her rude speech, he would at least have given
her the retort courteous.

Mrs. Talb.  Now tell me honestly, my Louisa--You were, a few days ago, at
Bursal House.  Since you have left it and have felt something of the
difference that is made in this world between splendour and no splendour,
you have never regretted that you did not stay there, and that you did
not bear more patiently with Miss Bursal's little airs?

Louisa.  Never for a moment.  At first Miss Bursal paid me a vast deal of
attention; but, for what reason I know not, she suddenly changed her
manner, grew first strangely cold, then condescendingly familiar, and at
last downright rude.  I could not guess the cause of these variations.

Mrs. Talb. (aside) I guess the cause too well.

Louisa.  But as I perceived the lady was out of tune, I was in haste to
leave her.  I should make a very bad, and, I am sure, a miserable toad
eater.  I had much rather, if I were obliged to choose, earn my own
bread, than live as toad eater with anybody.

Mrs. Talb.  Fine talking, dear Louisa!

Louisa.  Don't you believe me to be in earnest, mother!  To be sure, you
cannot know what I would do, unless I were put to the trial.

Mrs. Talb.  Nor you either, my dear.    (She sighs, and is silent.)

Louisa (takes her mother's hand).  What is the matter, dear mother?  You
used to say, that seeing my brother always made you feel ten years
younger; yet even while he was here, you had, in spite of all your
efforts to conceal them, those sudden fits of sadness.

Mrs. Talb.  The Montem--is not it to-morrow?  Ay, but my boy is not sure
of being captain.

Louisa.  No; there is one Wheeler, who, as he says, is most likely to be
chosen captain.  He has taken prodigious pains to flatter and win over
many to his interest.  My brother does not so much care about it; he is
not avaricious.

Mrs. Talb.  I love your generous spirit and his! but, alas! my dear,
people may live to want, and wish for money, without being avaricious.  I
would not say a word to Talbot; full of spirits as he was this morning, I
would not say a word to him, till after the Montem, of what has happened.

Louisa.  And what has happened, dear mother?  Sit down,--you tremble.

Mrs. Talb. (sits down and puts a letter into Louisa's hand.) Read that,
love.  A messenger brought me that from town a few hours ago.

Louisa (reads).  "By an express from Portsmouth, we hear the Bombay
Castle East Indiaman is lost, with all your fortune on board."  ALL!  I
hope there is something left for you to live upon.

Mrs. Talb.  About 15O pounds a year for us all.

Louisa.  That is enough, is it not, for YOU?

Mrs. Talb.  For me, love?  I am an old woman, and want but little in this
world, and shall be soon out of it.

Louisa (kneels down beside her).  Do not speak so, dearest mother.

Mrs. Talb.  Enough for me, love!  Yes, enough, and too much for me.  I am
not thinking of myself.

Louisa.  Then, as to my brother, he has such abilities, and such
industry, he will make a fortune at the bar for himself, most certainly.

Mrs. Talb.  But his education is not completed.  How shall we provide him
with money at Cambridge?

Louisa.  This Montem.  The last time the captain had eight hundred, the
time before a thousand, pounds.  Oh, I hope--I fear!  Now, indeed, I know
that, without being avaricious, we may want, and wish for money.

                 (Landlady's voice heard behind the scenes.)

Landlady.  Waiter!--Miss Bursal's curricle, and Mr. Bursal's vis-a-vis.
Run! see that the Dolphin's empty.  I say run!--run!

Mrs. Talb.  I will rest for a few moments upon the sofa, in this
bedchamber, before we set off.

Louisa (goes to open the door).  They have bolted or locked it.  How
unlucky!           (She turns the key, and tries to unlock the door.)

                           Enter WAITER.

Waiter.  Ladies, I'm sorry--Miss Bursal and Mr. Bursal are come--just
coming upstairs.

Mrs. Talb.  Then, will you be so good, sir, as to unlock this door?
                                (Waiter tries to unlock the door.)

Waiter.  It must be bolted on the inside.  Chambermaid!  Sally!  Are you
within there?  Unbolt this door.

                           Mr. Bursal's voice behind the scenes.

Mr. Burs.  Let me have a basin of good soup directly.

Waiter.  I'll go round and have the door unbolted immediately, ladies.
                                           (Exit Waiter.)

        Enter MISS BURSAL, in a riding dress, and with a long whip.

Miss Bursal.  Those creatures, the ponies, have a'most pulled my 'and
off.  Who 'ave we 'ere?  Ha!  Mrs. Talbot!  Louisa, 'ow are ye?  I'm so
vastly glad to see you; but I'm so shocked to 'ear of the loss of the
Bombay Castle.  Mrs. Talbot, you look but poorly; but this Montem will
put everybody in spirits.  I 'ear everybody's to be 'ere; and my brother
tells me, 'twill be the finest ever seen at HEton.  Louisa, my dear, I'm
sorry I've not a seat for you in my curricle for to-morrow; but I've
promised Lady Betty; so, you know, 'tis impossible for me.

Louisa.  Certainly; and it would be impossible for me to leave my mother
at present.

Chambermaid (opens the bedchamber door).  The room's ready now, ladies.

Mrs. Talb.  Miss Bursal, we intrude upon you no longer.

Miss Burs.  Nay, why do you decamp, Mrs. Talbot?  I 'ad a thousand things
to say to you, Louisa; but am so tired and so annoyed--

         (Seats herself. Exeunt Mrs. Talbot, Louisa and Chambermaid.)

          Enter MR. BURSAL, with a basin of soup in his hand.

Mr. Burs.  Well, thank my stars the Airly Castle is safe in the Downs.

Miss Burs.  Mr. Bursal, can you inform me why Joe, my groom, does not
make his appearance?

Mr. Burs. (eating and speaking).  Yes, that I can, child; because he is
with his 'orses, where he ought to be.  'Tis fit they should be looked
after well; for they cost me a pretty penny--more than their heads are
worth, and yours into the bargain; but I was resolved, as we were to come
to this Montem, to come in style.

Miss Burs.  In style, to be sure; for all the world's to be here--the
King, the Prince of WHales, and Duke o' York, and all the first people;
and we shall cut a dash!  Dash! dash! will be the word to-morrow!--
(playing with her whip).

Mr. Burs. (aside).  Dash! dash! ay, just like her brother.  He'll pay
away finely, I warrant, by the time he's her age.  Well, well, he can
afford it; and I do love to see my children make a figure for their
money.  As Jack Bursal says, what's money for, if it e'nt to make a
figure.  (Aloud).  There's your, brother Jack, now.  The extravagant dog!
he'll have such a dress as never was seen, I suppose, at this here
Montem.  Why, now, Jack Bursal spends more money at Eton, and has more to
spend, than my Lord John, though my Lord John's the son of a marchioness.

Miss Burs.  Oh, that makes no difference nowadays.  I wonder whether her
ladyship is to be at this Montem.  The only good I ever got out of these
stupid Talbots was an introduction to their friend Lady Piercefield.
What she could find to like in the Talbots, heaven knows.  I've a notion
she'll drop them, when she hears of the loss of the Bombay Castle.

                        Enter a WAITER, with a note.

Waiter.  A note from my Lady Piercefield, sir.

Miss B.  Charming woman!  Is she here, pray, sir?

Waiter.  Just come.  Yes, ma'am.           (Exit Waiter.)

Miss B.  Well, Mr. Bursal, what is it?

Mr. B. (reads).  "Business of importance to communicate--"  Hum! what can
it be?--(going).

Miss B. (aside).  Perhaps some match to propose for me!  (Aloud).  Mr.
Bursal, pray before you go to her ladyship, do send my OOMAN to me to
make me presentable.                (Exit Miss Bursal at one door.)

Mr. B. (at the opposite door).  "Business of importance!"   Hum! I'm glad
I'm prepared with a good basin of soup.  There's no doing business well
upon an empty stomach.  Perhaps the business is to lend cash; and I've no
great stomach for that.  But it will be an honour, to be sure.
                                                    (Exit.)



SCENE III.

                       Landlady's Parlour.

LANDLADY--MR. FINSBURY, a man-milliner, with bandboxes--a fancy cap, or
helmet, with feathers, in the Landlady's hand--a satin bag, covered with
gold netting, in the man-milliner's hand--a mantle hanging over his arm.
A rough looking Farmer is sitting with his back towards them, eating
