them, Mr. O'Ryan.  This may be a good joke to you; but it is none to me
or Talbot.  So Talbot never wrote a word of the song?

Rory.  Not a word or syllable, good or bad.

Lord J.  And I have given my promise to vote against him.  He'll lose his
election.

Rory.  Not if you'll give me leave to speak to your friends in your name.

Lord J.  I have promised to leave them to themselves; and Wheeler, I am
sure, has engaged them by this time.

Rory.  Bless my body!  I'll not stay prating here then.
                                               (Exit Rory.)

Lord J. (follows).  But what can have become of Talbot?  I have been too
hasty for once in my life.  Well, I shall suffer for it more than anybody
else; for I love Talbot, since he did not make the song, of which I hate
to think.                        (Exit.)



SCENE III.

A large hall in Eton College--A staircase at the end--Eton lads, dressed
in their Montem Dresses in the Scene--In front, WHEELER (dressed as
Captain), BURSAL and FINSBURY.

Fins.  I give you infinite credit, Mr. Wheeler, for this dress.

Burs.  INFINITE CREDIT!  Why, he'll have no objection to that--hey,
Wheeler?  But I thought Finsbury knew you too well to give you credit for
anything.

Fins.  You are pleased to be pleasant, sir.  Mr. Wheeler knows, in that
sense of the word, it is out of my power to give him credit, and I'm sure
he would not ask it.

Wheel. (aside).  O, Bursal, pay him, and I'll pay you tomorrow.

Burs.  Now, if you weren't to be captain after all, Wheeler, what a
pretty figure you'd cut.  Ha! ha! ha!--Hey?

Wheel.  Oh, I am as sure of being captain as of being alive.  (Aside.) Do
pay for me, now, there's a good, dear fellow, before THEY (looking back)
come up.

Burs. (aside).  I love to make him lick the dust.  (Aloud.)  Hollo!
here's Finsbury waiting to be paid, lads.  (To the lads who are in the
back scene.)  Who has paid, and who has not paid, I say?

(The lads come forward, and several exclaim at once,) I've paid!  I've
paid!

                   Enter LORD JOHN and RORY O'RYAN.

Rory.  Oh, King of Fashion, how fine we are!  Why, now, to look at ye all
one might fancy one's self at the playhouse at once, or at a fancy ball
in dear little Dublin.  Come, strike up a dance.

Burs.  Pshaw!  Wherever you come, Rory O'Ryan, no one else can be heard.
Who has paid, and who has not paid, I say?

Several Boys exclaim.  We've all paid.

1st Boy.  I've not paid, but here's my money.

Several Boys.  We have not paid, but here's our money.

6th Boy.  Order there, I am marshal.  All that have paid march off to the
staircase, and take your seats there, one by one.  March!

(As they march by, one by one, so as to display their dresses, Mr.
Finsbury bows, and says,)

A thousand thanks, gentlemen.  Thank you, gentlemen.  Thanks, gentlemen.
The finest sight ever I saw out of Lon'on.

Rory, as each lad passes, catches his arm, Are you a TalbotITE or a
WheelerITE?  To each who answers "A Wheelerite," Rory replies, "Phoo!
dance off, then.  Go to the devil and shake yourself."*   Each who
answers "A Talbotite," Rory shakes by the hand violently, singing,

     "Talbot, oh, Talbot's the dog for Rory."

*This is the name of a country dance.

When they have almost all passed, Lord John says, But where can Mr.
Talbot be all this time?

Burs.  Who knows?  Who cares?

Wheel.  A pretty electioneerer!  (Aside to Bursal.)  Finsbury's waiting
to be paid.

Lord J.  You don't wait for me, Mr. Finsbury.  You know, I have settled
with you.

Fins.  Yes, my lord--yes.  Many thanks:  and I have left your lordship's
dress here, and everybody's dress, I believe, as bespoke.

Burs.  Here, Finsbury, is the money for Wheeler, who, between you and me,
is as poor as a rat.

Wheeler (affecting to laugh.).  Well, I hope I shall be as rich as a Jew
to-morrow.  (Bursal counts money, in an ostentatious manner, into
Finsbury's hand.)

Fins.  A thousand thanks for all favours.

Rory.  You will be kind enough to LAVE Mr. Talbot's dress with me, Mr.
Finsbury, for I'm a friend.

Fins.  Indubitably, sir:  but the misfortune is--he! he! he!--Mr. Talbot,
sir, has bespoke no dress.  Your servant, gentlemen.
                                           (Exit Finsbury.)

Burs.  So your friend Mr. Talbot could not afford to bespeak a dress--
(Bursal and Wheeler laugh insolently.)  How comes that, I wonder?

Lord J.  If I'm not mistaken, here comes Talbot to answer for himself.

Rory.  But who, in the name of St. Patrick, has he along with him?

                  Enter TALBOT and LANDLORD.

Talb.  Come in along with us, Farmer Hearty--come in.

(Whilst the Farmer comes in, the boys who were sitting on the stairs,
rise and exclaim,)

Whom have we here?  What now?  Come down, lads; here's more fun.

Rory.  What's here, Talbot?

Talb.  An honest farmer, and a good natured landlord, who would come here
along with me to speak--

Farm. (interrupting).  To speak the truth--(strikes his stick on the
ground).

Landlord (unbuttoning his waistcoat).  But I am so hot--so short-winded,
that (panting and puffing)--that for the soul and body of me, I cannot
say what I have got for to say.

Rory.  'Faith, now, the more short winded a story, the better, to my
fancy.

Burs.  Wheeler, what's the matter, man? you look as if your under jaw was
broke.

Farm.  The matter is, young gentlemen, that there was once upon a time a
fine, bay hunter.

Wheel. (squeezing up to Talbot, aside).  Don't expose me, don't let him
tell.  (To the Farmer.)  I'll pay for the corn I spoiled.  (To the
Landlord.)  I'll pay for the horse.

Farm.  I does not want to be paid for my corn.  The short of it is, young
gentlemen, this 'un here, in the fine thing-em-bobs (pointing to
Wheeler), is a shabby fellow; he went and spoiled Master Newington's best
hunter.

Land. (panting).  Ruinationed him! ruinationed him!

Rory.  But was that all the shabbiness?  Now I might, or any of us might,
have had such an accident as that.  I suppose he paid the gentleman for
the horse, or will do so, in good time.

Land. (holding his sides).  Oh, that I had but a little breath in this
body o' mine to speak all--speak on, Farmer.

Farm. (striking his stick on the floor).  Oons, sir, when a man's put
out, he can't go on with his story.

Omnes.  Be quiet, Rory--hush!     (Rory puts his finger on his lips.)

Farm.  Why, sir, I was a-going to tell you the shabbiness--why, sir, he
did not pay the landlord, here, for the horse; but he goes and says to
the landlord, here--"Mr. Talbot had your horse on the self-same day;
'twas he did the damage; 'tis from he you must get your money."  So Mr.
Talbot, here, who is another sort of a gentleman (though he has not so
fine a coat) would not see a man at a loss, that could not afford it; and
not knowing which of 'em it was that spoiled the horse, goes, when he
finds the other would not pay a farthing, and pays all.

Rory (rubbing his hands).  There's Talbot for ye.  And, now, gentlemen
(to Wheeler and Bursal), you guess the RASON, as I do, I suppose, why he
bespoke no dress; he had not money enough to be fine--and honest, too.
You are very fine, Mr. Wheeler, to do you justice.

Lord J.  Pray, Mr. O'Ryan, let the farmer go on; he has more to say.  How
did you find out, pray, my good friend, that it was not Talbot who
spoiled the horse!  Speak loud enough to be heard by everybody.

Farm.  Ay, that I will--I say (very loudly) I say I saw him there
(pointing to Wheeler) take the jump which strained the horse; and I'm
ready to swear to it.  Yet he let another pay; there's the shabbiness.

(A general groan from all the lads.  "Oh, shabby Wheeler, shabby!  I'll
not vote for shabby Wheeler!")

Lord J. (aside).  Alas! I must vote for him.

                          Rory sings.

     "True game to the last; no Wheeler for me;
      Talbot, oh, Talbot's the dog for me."
                               (Several voices join the chorus.)

Burs.  Wheeler, if you are not chosen Captain, you must see and pay me
for the dress.

Wheel.  I am as poor as a rat.

Rory.  Oh, yes! oh yes! hear ye! hear ye, all manner of men--the election
is now going to begin forthwith in the big field, and Rory O'Ryan holds
the poll for Talbot.  Talbot for ever!--huzza!

(Exit Rory, followed by the Boys, who exclaim "Talbot for ever!--huzza!"
The Landlord and Farmer join them.)

Lord J.  Talbot, I am glad you are what I always thought you--I'm glad
you did not write that odious song.  I would not lose such a friend for
all the songs in the world.  Forgive me for my hastiness this morning.
I've punished myself--I've promised to vote for Wheeler.

Talb.  Oh, no matter whom you vote for, my lord, if you are still my
friend, and if you know me to be yours.      (They shake hands.)

Lord J.  I must not say, "Huzza for Talbot!"        (Exeunt.)



SCENE IV.

                         WINDSOR TERRACE.

LADY PIERCEFIELD, MRS. TALBOT, LOUISA, and a little girl of six years
old, LADY VIOLETTA, daughter to LADY PIERCEFIELD.

Violetta (looking at a paper which Louisa holds).  I like it VERY much.

Lady P.  What is it that you like VERY much, Violetta?

Violet.  You are not to know yet, mamma; it is--I may tell her that--it
is a little drawing that Louisa is doing for me.  Louisa, I wish you
would let me show it to mamma.

Louisa.  And welcome, my dear; it is only a sketch of "The Little
Merchants," a story which Violetta was reading, and she asked me to try
to draw the pictures of the little merchants for her.  (Whilst Lady P.
looks at the drawing, Violetta says to Louisa)

But are you in earnest, Louisa, about what you were saying to me just
now,--quite in earnest?

Louisa.  Yes, in earnest,--quite in earnest, my dear.

Violet.  And may I ask mamma, NOW?

Louisa.  If you please, my dear.

Violet. (runs to her mother).  Stoop down to me, mamma ; I've something
to whisper to you.

(Lady Piercefield stoops down; Violetta throws her arms round her
mother's neck.)

Violet. (aside to her mother).  Mamma, do you know--you know you want a
governess for me.

Lady P.  Yes, if I could find a good one.

Violet. (aloud).  Stoop again, mamma, I've more to whisper.  (Aside to
her mother).  SHE says she will be my governess, if you please.

Lady P.  SHE!--who is SHE?

Violet.  Louisa.

Lady P. (patting Violetta's cheek).  You are a little fool.  Miss Talbot
is only playing with you.

Violet.  No, indeed, mamma; she is in earnest; are not you, Louisa?--Oh,
say yes!

Louisa.  Yes.

Violet. (claps her hands).  YES, mamma; do you hear YES?

Louisa.  If Lady Piercefield will trust you to my care, I am persuaded
that I should be much happier as your governess, my good little Violetta,
than as an humble dependent of Miss Bursal's.  (Aside to her mother.)
You see that, now I am put to the trial, I keep to my resolution, dear
mother.

Mrs. T.  Your ladyship would not be surprised at this offer of my Louisa,
if you had heard, as we have done within these few hours, of the loss of
the East India ship in which almost our whole property was embarked.

Louisa.  The Bombay Castle is wrecked.

Lady P.  The Bombay Castle!  I have the pleasure to tell you that you are
misinformed--it was the Airly Castle that was wrecked.

Louisa and Mrs. T.  Indeed!

Lady P.  Yes; you may depend upon it--it was the Airly Castle that was
lost.  You know I am just come from Portsmouth, where I went to meet my
brother, Governor Morton, who came home with the last India fleet, and
from whom I had the intelligence.

(Here Violetta interrupts, to ask her mother for her nosegay--Lady P.
gives it to her, then goes on speaking.)

Lady P.  They were in such haste, foolish people! to carry their news to
London, that they mistook one castle for another.  But do you know that
Mr. Bursal loses fifty thousand pounds, it is said, by the Airly Castle!
When I told him she was lost, I thought he would have dropped down.
However, I found he comforted himself afterwards with a bottle of
Burgundy:  but poor Miss Bursal has been in hysterics ever since.

Mrs. T.  Poor girl!  My Louisa, YOU did not fall into hysterics, when I
told you of the loss of our whole fortune.

(Violetta, during this dialogue, has been seated on the ground making up
a nosegay.)

Violet. (aside).  Fall into hysterics!  What are hysterics, I wonder.

Louisa.  Miss Bursal is much to be pitied; for the loss of wealth will be
the loss of happiness to her.

Lady P.  It is to be hoped that the loss may at least check the foolish
pride and extravagance of young Bursal, who, as my son tells me--

               (A cry of "Huzza! huzza!" behind the scenes.)

                        Enter LORD JOHN.

Lord J.  (hastily).  How d'ye do, mother!  Miss Talbot, I give you joy.

Lady P.  Take breath--take breath.

Louisa.  It is my brother.

Mrs. T.  Here he is!--Hark! hark!

      (A cry behind the scenes of "Talbot and truth for ever! Huzza!")

Louisa.  They are chairing him.

Lord J.  Yes, they are chairing him; and he has been chosen for his
honourable conduct, not for his electioneering skill; for, to do him
justice, Coriolanus himself was not a worse electioneerer.

Enter RORY O'RYAN and another Eton lad, carrying TALBOT in a chair,
followed by a crowd of Eton lads.

Rory.  By your LAVE, my lord--by your LAVE, ladies.

Omnes.  Huzza!  Talbot and truth for ever!  Huzza!

Talb.  Set me down!  There's my mother!  There's my sister!

Rory.  Easy, easy.  Set him down?  No such TING! give him t'other huzza!
There's nothing like a good loud huzza in this world.  Yes, there is!
for, as my Lord John said just now, out of some book, or out of his own
head,--

     "One self-approving hour whole years outweighs,
      Of stupid starers and of loud huzzas."



                           CURTAIN FALLS.



FORGIVE AND FORGET.

In the neighbourhood of a seaport town in the west of England, there
lived a gardener, who had one son, called Maurice, to whom he was very
partial.  One day his father sent him to the neighbouring town to
purchase some garden seeds for him.  When Maurice got to the seed-shop,
it was full of people, who were all impatient to be served:  first a
great tall man, and next a great fat woman pushed before him; and he
stood quietly beside the counter, waiting till somebody should be at
leisure to attend to him.  At length, when all the other people who were
in the shop had got what they wanted, the shopman turned to Maurice--"And
what do you want, my patient little fellow?" said he.

"I want all these seeds for my father," said Maurice, putting a list of
seeds into the shopman's hand; "and I have brought money to pay for them
all."

The seedsman looked out all the seeds that Maurice wanted, and packed
them up in paper:  he was folding up some painted lady-peas, when, from a
door at the back of the shop, there came in a square, rough-faced man,
who exclaimed, the moment he came in, "Are the seeds I ordered ready?--
The wind's fair--they ought to have been aboard yesterday.  And my china
jar, is it packed up and directed? where is it?"

"It is up there on the shelf over your head, sir," answered the seedsman.
"It is very safe, you see; but we have not had time to pack it yet.  It
shall be done to-day; and we will get the seeds ready for you, sir,
immediately."

"Immediately! then stir about it.  The seeds will not pack themselves up.
Make haste, pray."

"Immediately, sir, as soon as I have done up the parcel for this little
boy."

"What signifies the parcel for this little boy?  He can wait, and I
cannot--wind and tide wait for no man.  Here, my good lad, take your
parcel, and sheer off," said the impatient man; and, as he spoke, he took
up the parcel of seeds from the counter, as the shopman stooped to look
for a sheet of thick brown paper and packthread to tie it up.

The parcel was but loosely folded up, and as the impatient man lifted it,
the weight of the peas which were withinside of it burst the paper, and
all the seeds fell out upon the floor, whilst Maurice in vain held his
hands to catch them.  The peas rolled to all parts of the shop; the
impatient man swore at them, but Maurice, without being out of humour,
set about collecting them as fast as possible.

Whilst the boy was busied in this manner, the man got what seeds he
wanted; and as he was talking about them, a sailor came into the shop,
and said, "Captain, the wind has changed within these five minutes, and
it looks as if we should have ugly weather."

"Well, I'm glad of it," replied the rough faced man, who was the captain
of a ship.  "I am glad to have a day longer to stay ashore, and I've
business enough on my hands."  The captain pushed forward towards the
shop door.  Maurice, who was kneeling on the floor, picking up his seeds,
saw that the captain's foot was entangled in some packthread which hung
down from the shelf on which the china jar stood.  Maurice saw that, if
the captain took one more step forward, he must pull the string, so that
it would throw down the jar, round the bottom of which the packthread was
entangled.  He immediately caught hold of the captain's leg, and stopped
him.  "Stay!  Stand still, sir!" said he, "or you will break your china
jar."

The man stood still, looked, and saw how the packthread had caught in his
shoe buckle, and how it was near dragging down his beautiful china jar.
"I am really very much obliged to you, my little fellow," said he.  "You
have saved my jar, which I would not have broken for ten guineas, for it
is for my wife, and I've brought it safe from abroad many a league.  It
would have been a pity if I had broken it just when it was safe landed.
I am really much obliged to you, my little fellow, this was returning
good for evil.  I am sorry I threw down your seeds, as you are such a
good natured, forgiving boy.  Be so kind," continued he, turning to the
shopman, "as to reach down that china jar for me."

The shopman lifted down the jar very carefully, and the captain took off
the cover, and pulled out some tulip roots.  "You seem, by the quantity
of seeds you have got, to belong to a gardener.  Are you fond of
gardening?" said he to Maurice.

"Yes, sir," replied Maurice, "very fond of it; for my father is a
gardener, and he lets me help him at his work, and he has given me a
little garden of my own."

"Then here are a couple of tulip-roots for you; and if you take care of
them, I'll promise you that you will have the finest tulips in England in
your little garden.  These tulips were given to me by a Dutch merchant,
who told me that they were some of the rarest and finest in Holland.
They will prosper with you, I'm sure, wind and weather permitting."

Maurice thanked the gentleman, and returned home, eager to show his
precious tulip-roots to his father, and to a companion of his, the son of
a nurseryman, who lived near him.  Arthur was the name of the
nurseryman's son.

The first thing Maurice did, after showing his tulip-roots to his father,
was to run to Arthur's garden in search of him.  Their gardens were
separated only by a low wall of loose stones:  "Arthur! Arthur! where are
you?  Are you in your garden!  I want you."  But Arthur made no answer,
and did not, as usual, come running to meet his friend.  "I know where
you are," continued Maurice, "and I'm coming to you as fast as the
raspberry-bushes will let me.  I have good news for you--something you'll
be delighted to see, Arthur!--Ha!--but here is something that I am not
delighted to see, I am sure," said poor Maurice, who, when he had got
through the raspberry-bushes, and had come in sight of his own garden,
beheld his bell-glass--his beloved bell-glass, under which his cucumbers
were grown so finely--his only bell-glass, broken to pieces!

"I am sorry for it," said Arthur, who stood leaning upon his spade in his
own garden; "I am afraid you will be very angry with me."

"Why, was it you, Arthur, broke my bell-glass!  Oh, how could you do so?"

"I was throwing weeds and rubbish over the wall, and by accident a great
lump of couch-grass, with stones hanging to the roots, fell upon your
bell-glass, and broke it, as you see."

Maurice lifted up the lump of couch-grass, which had fallen through the
broken glass upon his cucumbers, and he looked at his cucumbers for a
moment in silence--"Oh, my poor cucumbers! you must all die now.  I shall
see all your yellow flowers withered tomorrow; but it is done, and it
cannot be helped; so, Arthur, let us say no more about it."

"You are very good; I thought you would have been angry.  I am sure I
should have been exceedingly angry if you had broken the glass, if it had
been mine."

"Oh, forgive and forget, as my father always says; that's the best way.
Look what I have got for you."  Then he told Arthur the story of the
captain of the ship, and the china jar; the seeds having been thrown
down, and of the fine tulip-roots which had been given to him; and
Maurice concluded by offering one of the precious roots to Arthur, who
thanked him with great joy, and repeatedly said, "How good you were not
to be angry with me for breaking your bell-glass!  I am much more sorry
for it than if you had been in a passion with me!"

Arthur now went to plant his tulip-root:  and Maurice looked at the beds
which his companion had been digging, and at all the things which were
coming up in his garden.

"I don't know how it is," said Arthur, "but you always seem as glad to
see the things in my garden coming up, and doing well, as if they were
all your own.  I am much happier since my father came to live here, and
since you and I have been allowed to work and to play together, than I
ever was before; for you must know, before we came to live here, I had a
cousin in the house with me, who used to plague me.  He was not nearly so
good-natured as you are.  He never took pleasure in looking at my garden,
or at anything that I did that was well done; and he never gave me a
share of anything that he had; and so I did not like him; how could I?
But, I believe that hating people makes us unhappy; for I know I never
was happy when I was quarrelling with him; and I am always happy with
you, Maurice.  You know we never quarrel."

It would be well for all the world if they could be convinced, like
Arthur, that to live in friendship is better than to quarrel.  It would
be well for all the world if they followed Maurice's maxim of "Forgive
and Forget," when they receive, or when they imagine that they receive,
an injury.

Arthur's father, Mr. Oakly, the nurseryman, was apt to take offence at
trifles; and when he thought that any of his neighbours disobliged him,
he was too proud to ask them to explain their conduct; therefore he was
often mistaken in his judgment of them.  He thought that it showed
SPIRIT, to remember and to resent an injury; and, therefore, though he
was not an ill-natured man, he was sometimes led, by this mistaken idea
of SPIRIT, to do ill-natured things:  "A warm friend and a bitter enemy,"
was one of his maxims, and he had many more enemies than friends.  He was
not very rich, but he was proud; and his favourite proverb was, "Better
live in spite than in pity."

When first he settled near Mr. Grant, the gardener, he felt inclined to
dislike him, because he was told that Mr. Grant was a Scotchman, and he
had a prejudice against Scotchmen; all of whom he believed to be cunning
and avaricious, because he had once been over-reached by a Scotch
peddler.  Grant's friendly manners in some degree conquered this
prepossession but still he secretly suspected that THIS CIVILITY, as he
said, "was all show, and that he was not, nor could not, being a
Scotchman, be such a hearty friend as a true-born Englishman."

Grant had some remarkably fine raspberries.  The fruit was so large, as
to be quite a curiosity.  When it was in season, many strangers came from
the neighbouring town, which was a sea-bathing place, to look at these
raspberries, which obtained the name of Brobdingnag raspberries.

"How came you, pray, neighbour Grant, if a man may ask, by these
wonderful fine raspberries?" said Mr. Oakly, one evening, to the
gardener.

"That's a secret," replied Grant, with an arch smile.

"Oh, in case it's a secret, I've no more to say; for I never meddle with
any man's secrets that he does not choose to trust me with.  But I wish,
neighbour Grant, you would put down that book.  You are always poring
over some book or another when a man comes to see you, which is not,
according to my notions (being a plain, UNLARNED Englishman bred and
born), so civil and neighbourly as might be."

Mr. Grant hastily shut his book, but remarked, with a shrewd glance at
his son, that it was in that book he found his Brobdingnag raspberries.

"You are pleased to be pleasant upon them that have not the luck to be as
book-LARNED as yourself, Mr. Grant; but I take it, being only a plain
spoken Englishman, as I observed afore, that one is to the full as like
to find a raspberry in one's garden as in one's book, Mr. Grant."

Grant, observing that his neighbour spoke rather in a surly tone, did not
contradict him; being well versed in the Bible, he knew that "A soft word
turneth away wrath," and he answered, in a good humoured voice, "I hear,
neighbour Oakly, you are likely to make a great deal of money of your
nursery this year.  Here's to the health of you and yours, not forgetting
the seedling larches, which I see are coming on finely."

"Thank ye, neighbour, kindly; the larches are coming on tolerably well,
that's certain; and here's to your good health, Mr. Grant--you and yours,
not forgetting your, what dye call 'em raspberries"--(drinks)--and, after
a pause, resumes, "I'm not apt to be a beggar, neighbour, but if you
could give me--"

Here Mr. Oakly was interrupted by the entrance of some strangers, and he
did finish making his request--Mr. Oakly was not, as he said of himself,
apt to ask favours, and nothing but Grant's cordiality could have
conquered his prejudices, so far as to tempt him to ask a favour from a
Scotchman.  He was going to have asked for some of the Brobdingnag
raspberry-plants.  The next day the thought of the raspberry-plants
recurred to his memory, but being a bashful man, he did not like to go
himself on purpose to make his request, and he desired his wife, who was
just setting out to market, to call at Grant's gate, and, if he was at
work in his garden, to ask him for a few plants of his raspberries.

The answer which Oakly's wife brought to him was that Mr. Grant had not a
raspberry-plant in the world to give him, and that if he had ever so
many, he would not give one away, except to his own son.

Oakly flew into a passion when he received such a message, declared it
was just such a mean, shabby trick as might have been expected from a
Scotchman--called himself a booby, a dupe, and a blockhead, for ever
having trusted to the civil speeches of a Scotchman--swore that he would
die in the parish workhouse before he would ever ask another favour, be
it ever so small, from a Scotchman; related to his wife, for the
hundredth time, the way in which he had been taken in by the Scotch
peddler ten years ago, and concluded by forswearing all further
intercourse with Mr. Grant, and all belonging to him.

"Son Arthur," said he, addressing himself to the boy, who just then came
in from work--"Son Arthur, do you hear me? let me never again see you
with Grant's son."

"With Maurice, father?"

"With Maurice Grant, I say; I forbid you from this day and hour forward
to have anything to do with him."

"Oh, why, dear father?"

"Ask no questions but do as I bid you."

Arthur burst out a crying, and only said, "Yes, father, I'll do as you
bid me, to be sure."

"Why now, what does the boy cry for?  Is there no other boy, simpleton,
think you, to play with, but this Scotchman's son!  I'll find out another
play-fellow for ye, child, if that be all."

"That's not all, father," said Arthur, trying to stop himself from
sobbing; "but the thing is, I shall never have such another play-fellow,-
-I shall never have such another friend as Maurice Grant."

"Like father like son--you may think yourself well off to have done with
him."

"Done with him!  Oh, father, and shall I never go again to work in his
garden, and may not he come to mine?"

"No," replied Oakly, sturdily; "his father has used me uncivil, and no
man shall use me uncivil twice.  I say no.  Wife, sweep up this hearth.
Boy, don't take on like a fool; but eat thy bacon and greens, and let's
hear no more of Maurice Grant."

Arthur promised to obey his father.  He only begged that he might once
more speak to Maurice, and tell him that it was by his father's orders he
acted.  This request was granted; but when Arthur further begged to know
what reason he might give for this separation, his father refused to tell
his reasons.  The two friends took leave of one another very sorrowfully.

Mr. Grant, when he heard of all this, endeavoured to discover what could
have offended his neighbour; but all explanation was prevented by the
obstinate silence of Oakly.

Now, the message which Grant really sent about the Brobdingnag
raspberries was somewhat different from that which Mr. Oakly received.
The message was, that the raspberries were not Mr. Grant's; that
therefore he had no right to give them away; that they belonged to his
son Maurice, and that this was not the right time of year for planting
them.  This message had been unluckily misunderstood.  Grant gave his
answer to his wife; she to a Welsh servant-girl, who did not perfectly
comprehend her mistress' broad Scotch; and she in her turn could not make
herself intelligible to Mrs. Oakly, who hated the Welsh accent, and whose
attention, when the servant-girl delivered the message, was principally
engrossed by the management of her own horse.  The horse, on which Mrs.
Oakly rode this day being ill-broken, would not stand still quietly at
the gate, and she was extremely impatient to receive her answer, and to
ride on to market.

Oakly, when he had once resolved to dislike his neighbour Grant, could
not long remain without finding out fresh causes of complaint.  There was
in Grant's garden a plum-tree, which was planted close to the loose stone
wall that divided the garden from the nursery.  The soil in which the
plum tree was planted happened not to be quite so good as that which was
on the opposite side of the wall, and the plum-tree had forced its way
through the wall, and gradually had taken possession of the ground which
it liked best.

Oakly thought the plum-tree, as it belonged to Mr. Grant, had no right to
make its appearance on his ground:  an attorney told him that he might
oblige Grant to cut it down; but Mr. Grant refused to cut down his plum-
tree at the attorney's desire, and the attorney persuaded Oakly to go to
law about the business, and the lawsuit went on for some months.

The attorney, at the end of this time, came to Oakly with a demand for
money to carry on his suit, assuring him that, in a short time, it would
be determined in his favour.  Oakly paid his attorney ten golden guineas,
remarked that it was a great sum for him to pay, and that nothing but the
love of justice could make him persevere in this lawsuit about a bit of
ground, "which, after all," said he, "is not worth twopence.  The plum-
tree does me little or no damage, but I don't like to be imposed upon by
a Scotchman."

The attorney saw and took advantage of Oakly's prejudice against the
natives of Scotland; and he persuaded him, that to show the SPIRIT of a
true-born Englishman it was necessary, whatever it might cost him, to
persist in this law suit.

It was soon after this conversation with the attorney that Mr. Oakly
walked, with resolute steps, towards the plum-tree, saying to himself,
"If it cost me a hundred pounds I will not let this cunning Scotchman get
the better of me."

Arthur interrupted his father's reverie, by pointing to a book and some
young plants which lay upon the wall.  "I fancy, father," said he, "those
things are for you, for there is a little note directed to you, in
Maurice's handwriting.  Shall I bring it to you?"

"Yes, let me read it, child, since I must."  It contained these words:

"DEAR MR. OAKLY,--I don't know why you have quarrelled with us; I am very
sorry for it.  But though you are angry with me, I am not angry with you.
I hope you will not refuse some of my Brobdingnag raspberry-plants, which
you asked for a great while ago, when we were all good friends.  It was
not the right time of the year to plant them, which was the reason they
were not sent to you; but it is just the right time to plant them now;
and I send you the book, in which you will find the reason why we always
put seaweed ashes about their roots; and I have got some seaweed ashes
for you.  You will find the ashes in the flower-pot upon the wall.  I
have never spoken to Arthur, nor he to me, since you bid us not.  So,
wishing your Brobdingnag raspberries may turn out as well as ours, and
longing to be all friends again, I am, with love to dear Arthur and self,
                     "Your affectionate neighbour's son,
                                              "MAURICE GRANT.
"P.S.--It is now about four months since the quarrel began, and that is a
very long while."

A great part of the effect of this letter was lost upon Oakly, because he
was not very expert in reading writing, and it cost him much trouble to
spell it and put it together.  However, he seemed affected by it, and
said, "I believe this Maurice loves you well enough, Arthur, and he seems
a good sort of boy; but as to the raspberries, I believe all that he says
about them is but an excuse; and, at anyrate, as I could not get 'em when
I asked for them, I'll not have 'em now.  Do you hear me, I say, Arthur?
What are you reading there?"

Arthur was reading the page that was doubled down in the book, which
Maurice had left along with the raspberry-plants upon the wall.  Arthur
read aloud as follows:--

               (Monthly Magazine, Dec. '98, p. 421.)

"There is a sort of strawberry cultivated at Jersey, which is almost
covered with seaweed in the winter, in like manner as many plants in
England are with litter from the stable.  These strawberries are usually
of the largeness of a middle-sized apricot, and the flavour is
particularly grateful.  In Jersey and Guernsey, situate scarcely one
degree farther south than Cornwall, all kinds of fruit, pulse, and
vegetables are produced in their seasons a fortnight or three weeks
sooner than in England, even on the southern shores; and snow will
scarcely remain twenty-four hours on the earth.  Although this may be
attributed to these islands being surrounded with a salt, and
consequently a moist atmosphere, yet the ashes (seaweed ashes) made use
of as manure, may also have their portion of influence."*

*It is necessary to observe that this experiment has never been actually
tried upon raspberry-plants.

"And here," continued Arthur, "is something written with a pencil, on a
slip of paper, and it is Maurice's writing.  I will read it to you.

"'When I read in this book what is said about the strawberries growing as
large as apricots, after they had been covered over with seaweed, I
thought that perhaps seaweed ashes might be good for my father's
raspberries; and I asked him if he would give me leave to try them.  He
gave me leave, and I went directly and gathered together some seaweed
that had been cast on shore; and I dried it, and burned it, and then I
manured the raspberries with it, and the year afterwards the raspberries
grew to the size that you have seen.  Now, the reason I tell you this is,
first, that you may know how to manage your raspberries, and next,
because I remember you looked very grave, as if you were not pleased with
my father, Mr. Grant, when he told you that the way by which he came by
his Brobdingnag raspberries was a secret.  Perhaps this was the thing
that has made you so angry with us all; for you never have come to see
father since that evening.  Now I have told you all I know; and so I hope
you will not be angry with us any longer.'"

Mr. Oakly was much pleased by this openness, and said, "Why now, Arthur,
this is something like, this is telling one the thing one wants to know,
without fine speeches.  This is like an Englishman more than a Scotchman.
Pray, Arthur, do you know whether your friend Maurice was born in England
or in Scotland?"

"No, indeed, sir, I don't know--I never asked--I did not think it
signified.  All I know is, that wherever he was born, he is VERY good.
Look, papa, my tulip is blowing."

"Upon my word," said his father, "this will be a beautiful tulip!"

"It was given to me by Maurice."

"And did you give him nothing for it?" was the father's inquiry.

"Nothing in the world; and he gave it to me just at the time when he had
good cause to be angry with me, just when I had broken his bell-glass."

"I have a great mind to let you play together again," said Arthur's
father.

"Oh, if you would," cried Arthur, clapping his hands, "how happy we
should be!  Do you know, father, I have often sat for an hour at a time
up in that crab-tree, looking at Maurice at work in his garden, and
wishing that I was at work with him."

Here Arthur was interrupted by the attorney, who came to ask Mr. Oakly
some question about the lawsuit concerning the plum-tree.  Oakly showed
him Maurice's letter; and to Arthur's extreme astonishment, the attorney
had no sooner read it, than he exclaimed, "What an artful little
gentleman this is!  I never, in the course of all my practice, met with
anything better.  Why, this is the most cunning letter I ever read."

"Where's the cunning?" said Oakly, and he put on his spectacles.

"My good sir, don't you see, that all this stuff about Brobdingnag
raspberries is to ward off your suit about the plum-tree?  They know--
that is, Mr. Grant, who is sharp enough, knows--that he will be worsted
in that suit; that he must, in short, pay you a good round sum for
damages, if it goes on--"

"Damages!" said Oakly, staring round him at the plum-tree; "but I don't
know what you mean.  I mean nothing but what's honest.  I don't mean to
ask for any good round sum; for the plum-tree has done me no great harm
by coming into my garden; but only I don't choose it should come there
without my leave."

"Well, well," said the attorney, "I understand all that; but what I want
to make you, Mr. Oakly, understand, is, that this Grant and his son only
want to make up matters with you, and prevent the thing's coming to a
fair trial, by sending on, in this underhand sort of way, a bribe of a
few raspberries."

"A bribe!" exclaimed Oakly, "I never took a bribe, and I never will";
and, with sudden indignation, he pulled the raspberry plants from the
ground in which Arthur was planting them; and he threw them over the wall
into Grant's garden.

Maurice had put his tulip, which was beginning to blow, in a flower-pot,
on the top of the wall, in hopes that his friend Arthur would see it from
day to day.  Alas! he knew not in what a dangerous situation he had
placed it.  One of his own Brobdingnag raspberry-plants, swung by the
angry arm of Oakly, struck off the head of his precious tulip!  Arthur,
who was full of the thought of convincing his father that the attorney
was mistaken in his judgment of poor Maurice, did not observe the fall of
the tulip.

The next day, when Maurice saw his raspberry-plants scattered upon the
ground, and his favourite tulip broken, he was in much astonishment, and,
for some moments, angry; but anger, with him, never lasted long.  He was
convinced that all this must be owing to some accident or mistake.  He
could not believe that anyone could be so malicious as to injure him on
purpose--"And even if they did all this on purpose to vex me," said he to
himself, "the best thing I can do, is, not to let it vex me.  Forgive and
forget."  This temper of mind Maurice was more happy in enjoying than he
could have been made, without it, by the possession of all the tulips in
Holland.

Tulips were, at this time, things of great consequence in the estimation
of the country several miles round where Maurice and Arthur lived.  There
was a florist's feast to be held at the neighbouring town, at which a
prize of a handsome set of gardening-tools was to be given to the person
who could produce the finest flower of its kind.  A tulip was the flower
which was thought the finest the preceding year, and consequently numbers
of people afterwards endeavoured to procure tulip-roots, in hopes of
obtaining the prize this year.  Arthur's tulip was beautiful.  As he
examined it from day to day, and every day thought it improving, he
longed to thank his friend Maurice for it; and he often mounted into his
crab-tree, to look into Maurice's garden, in hopes of seeing his tulip
also in full bloom and beauty.  He never could see it.

The day of the florist's feast arrived, and Oakly went with his son and
the fine tulip to the place of meeting.  It was on a spacious bowling-
green.  All the flowers of various sorts were ranged upon a terrace at
the upper end of the bowling-green; and, amongst all this gay variety,
the tulip which Maurice had given to Arthur appeared conspicuously
beautiful.  To the owner of this tulip the prize was adjudged; and, as
the handsome garden-tools were delivered to Arthur, he heard a well known
voice wish him joy.  He turned, looked about him, and saw his friend
Maurice.

"But, Maurice, where is your own tulip?" said Mr. Oakly; "I thought,
Arthur, you told me that he kept one for himself."

"So I did," said Maurice; "but somebody (I suppose by accident) broke
it."

"Somebody! who?" cried Arthur and Mr. Oakly at once.

"Somebody who threw the raspberry-plants back again over the wall,"
replied Maurice.

"That was me--that somebody was me," said Oakly.  "I scorn to deny it;
but I did not intend to break your tulip, Maurice."

"Dear Maurice," said Arthur--"you know I may call him dear Maurice--now
you are by, papa; here are all the garden-tools; take them, and welcome."

"Not one of them," said Maurice, drawing back.

"Offer them to the father--offer them to Mr. Grant," whispered Oakly;
"he'll take them, I'll answer for it."

Mr. Oakly was mistaken:  the father would not accept of the tools.  Mr.
Oakly stood surprised--"Certainly," said he to himself, "this cannot be
such a miser as I took him for"; and he walked immediately up to Grant,
and bluntly said to him, "Mr. Grant, your son has behaved very handsomely
to my son; and you seem to be glad of it."

"To be sure I am," said Grant

"Which," continued Oakly, "gives me a better opinion of you than ever I
had before--I mean, than ever I had since the day you sent me the shabby
answer about those foolish, what d'ye call em, cursed raspberries."

"What shabby answer?" said Grant, with surprise; and Oakly repeated
exactly the message which he received; and Grant declared that he never
sent any such message.  He repeated exactly the answer which he really
sent, and Oakly immediately stretched out his hand to him, saying "I
believe you:  no more need be said.  I'm only sorry I did not ask you
about this four months ago; and so I should have done if you had not been
a Scotchman.  Till now, I never rightly liked a Scotchman.  We may thank
this good little fellow," continued he, turning to Maurice, "for our
coming at last to a right understanding.  There was no holding out
against his good nature.  I'm sure, from the bottom of my heart, I'm
sorry I broke his tulip.  Shake hands, boys; I'm glad to see you, Arthur,
look so happy again, and hope Mr. Grant will forgive--"

"Oh, forgive and forget," said Grant and his son at the same moment.  And
from this time forward the two families lived in friendship with each
other.

Oakly laughed at his own folly, in having been persuaded to go to law
about the plum-tree; and he, in process of time, so completely conquered
his early prejudice against Scotchmen, that he and Grant became partners
in business.  Mr. Grant's book-LARNING and knowledge of arithmetic he
found highly useful to him; and he, on his side, possessed a great many
active, good qualities, which became serviceable to his partner.

The two boys rejoiced in this family union; and Arthur often declared
that they owed all their happiness to Maurice's favourite maxim, "Forgive
and Forget."



WASTE NOT, WANT NOT; or TWO STRINGS TO YOUR BOW.

Mr. Gresham, a Bristol merchant, who had, by honourable industry and
economy, accumulated a considerable fortune, retired from business to a
new house which he had built upon the Downs, near Clifton.  Mr. Gresham,
however, did not imagine that a new house alone could make him happy.  He
did not propose to live in idleness and extravagance; for such a life
would have been equally incompatible with his habits and his principles.
He was fond of children; and as he had no sons, he determined to adopt
one of his relations.  He had two nephews, and he invited both of them to
his house, that he might have an opportunity of judging of their
dispositions, and of the habits which they had acquired.

Hal and Benjamin, Mr. Gresham's nephews, were about ten years old.  They
had been educated very differently.  Hal was the son of the elder branch
of the family.  His father was a gentleman, who spent rather more than he
could afford; and Hal, from the example of the servants in his father's
family, with whom he had passed the first years of his childhood, learned
to waste more of everything than he used.  He had been told that
"gentlemen should be above being careful and saving":  and he had
unfortunately imbibed a notion that extravagance was the sign of a
generous disposition, and economy of an avaricious one.

Benjamin, on the contrary, had been taught habits of care and foresight.
His father had but a very small fortune, and was anxious that his son
should early learn that economy ensures independence, and sometimes puts
it in the power of those who are not very rich to be very generous.

The morning after these two boys arrived at their uncle's they were eager
to see all the rooms in the house.  Mr. Gresham accompanied them, and
attended to their remarks and exclamations.

"Oh! what an excellent motto!" exclaimed Ben, when he read the following
words, which were written in large characters over the chimney-piece, in
his uncle's spacious kitchen--

     "WASTE NOT, WANT NOT."

"'Waste not, want not!'" repeated his cousin Hal, in rather a
contemptuous tone; "I think it looks stingy to servants; and no
gentleman's servants, cooks especially, would like to have such a mean
