calmly dropped his sword.  Evan stared round in an unusual
bewilderment, and then realized that a large man in pale clothes
and a Panama hat was strolling serenely towards them.



V. THE PEACEMAKER

When the combatants, with crossed swords, became suddenly
conscious of a third party, they each made the same movement.  It
was as quick as the snap of a pistol, and they altered it
instantaneously and recovered their original pose, but they had
both made it, they had both seen it, and they both knew what it
was.  It was not a movement of anger at being interrupted.  Say or
think what they would, it was a movement of relief.  A force
within them, and yet quite beyond them, seemed slowly and
pitilessly washing away the adamant of their oath.  As mistaken
lovers might watch the inevitable sunset of first love, these men
watched the sunset of their first hatred.

Their hearts were growing weaker and weaker against each other.
When their weapons rang and riposted in the little London garden,
they could have been very certain that if a third party had
interrupted them something at least would have happened.  They
would have killed each other or they would have killed him.  But
now nothing could undo or deny that flash of fact, that for a
second they had been glad to be interrupted.  Some new and strange
thing was rising higher and higher in their hearts like a high
sea at night.  It was something that seemed all the more
merciless, because it might turn out an enormous mercy.  Was
there, perhaps, some such fatalism in friendship as all lovers
talk about in love?  Did God make men love each other against
their will?

"I'm sure you'll excuse my speaking to you," said the stranger,
in a voice at once eager and deprecating.

The voice was too polite for good manners.  It was incongruous
with the eccentric spectacle of the duellists which ought to have
startled a sane and free man.  It was also incongruous with the
full and healthy, though rather loose physique of the man who
spoke.  At the first glance he looked a fine animal, with curling
gold beard and hair, and blue eyes, unusually bright.  It was only
at the second glance that the mind felt a sudden and perhaps
unmeaning irritation at the way in which the gold beard retreated
backwards into the waistcoat, and the way in which the finely
shaped nose went forward as if smelling its way.  And it was only,
perhaps, at the hundredth glance that the bright blue eyes, which
normally before and after the instant seemed brilliant with
intelligence, seemed as it were to be brilliant with idiocy.  He
was a heavy, healthy-looking man, who looked all the larger
because of the loose, light coloured clothes that he wore, and
that had in their extreme lightness and looseness, almost a touch
of the tropics.  But a closer examination of his attire would have
shown that even in the tropics it would have been unique; but it
was all woven according to some hygienic texture which no human
being had ever heard of before, and which was absolutely
necessary even for a day's health.  He wore a huge broad-brimmed
hat, equally hygienic, very much at the back of his head, and his
voice coming out of so heavy and hearty a type of man was, as I
have said, startlingly shrill and deferential.

"I'm sure you'll excuse my speaking to you," he said.  "Now, I
wonder if you are in some little difficulty which, after all, we
could settle very comfortably together?  Now, you don't mind my
saying this, do you?"

The face of both combatants remained somewhat solid under this
appeal.  But the stranger, probably taking their silence for a
gathering shame, continued with a kind of gaiety:

"So you are the young men I have read about in the papers.  Well,
of course, when one is young, one is rather romantic.  Do you know
what I always say to young people?"

A blank silence followed this gay inquiry.  Then Turnbull said in
a colourless voice:

"As I was forty-seven last birthday, I probably came into the
world too soon for the experience."

"Very good, very good," said the friendly person.  "Dry Scotch
humour.  Dry Scotch humour.  Well now. I understand that you two
people want to fight a duel.  I suppose you aren't much up in the
modern world.  We've quite outgrown duelling, you know.  In fact,
Tolstoy tells us that we shall soon outgrow war, which he says is
simply a duel between nations.  A duel between nations.  But there
is no doubt about our having outgrown duelling."

Waiting for some effect upon his wooden auditors, the stranger
stood beaming for a moment and then resumed:

"Now, they tell me in the newspapers that you are really wanting
to fight about something connected with Roman Catholicism.  Now,
do you know what I always say to Roman Catholics?"

"No," said Turnbull, heavily.  "Do _they_?"  It seemed to be a
characteristic of the hearty, hygienic gentleman that he always
forgot the speech he had made the moment before.  Without
enlarging further on the fixed form of his appeal to the Church
of Rome, he laughed cordially at Turnbull's answer; then his
wandering blue eyes caught the sunlight on the swords, and he
assumed a good-humoured gravity.

"But you know this is a serious matter," he said, eyeing Turnbull
and MacIan, as if they had just been keeping the table in a roar
with their frivolities.  "I am sure that if I appealed to your
higher natures...your higher natures.  Every man has a higher
nature and a lower nature.  Now, let us put the matter very
plainly, and without any romantic nonsense about honour or
anything of that sort.  Is not bloodshed a great sin?"

"No," said MacIan, speaking for the first time.

"Well, really, really!" said the peacemaker.

"Murder is a sin," said the immovable Highlander.  "There is no
sin of bloodshed."

"Well, we won't quarrel about a word," said the other,
pleasantly.

"Why on earth not?" said MacIan, with a sudden asperity.  "Why
shouldn't we quarrel about a word?  What is the good of words if
they aren't important enough to quarrel over?  Why do we choose
one word more than another if there isn't any difference between
them?  If you called a woman a chimpanzee instead of an angel,
wouldn't there be a quarrel about a word?  If you're not going to
argue about words, what are you going to argue about?  Are you
going to convey your meaning to me by moving your ears?  The
Church and the heresies always used to fight about words, because
they are the only things worth fighting about.  I say that murder
is a sin, and bloodshed is not, and that there is as much
difference between those words as there is between the word 'yes'
and the word 'no'; or rather more difference, for 'yes' and 'no',
at least, belong to the same category.  Murder is a spiritual
incident.  Bloodshed is a physical incident.  A surgeon commits
bloodshed.

"Ah, you're a casuist!" said the large man, wagging his head.
"Now, do you know what I always say to casuists...?"

MacIan made a violent gesture; and Turnbull broke into open
laughter.  The peacemaker did not seem to be in the least annoyed,
but continued in unabated enjoyment.

"Well, well," he said, "let us get back to the point.  Now Tolstoy
has shown that force is no remedy; so you see the position in
which I am placed.  I am doing my best to stop what I'm sure you
won't mind my calling this really useless violence, this really
quite wrong violence of yours.  But it's against my principles to
call in the police against you, because the police are still on a
lower moral plane, so to speak, because, in short, the police
undoubtedly sometimes employ force.  Tolstoy has shown that
violence merely breeds violence in the person towards whom it is
used, whereas Love, on the other hand, breeds Love.  So you see
how I am placed.  I am reduced to use Love in order to stop you.
I am obliged to use Love."

He gave to the word an indescribable sound of something hard and
heavy, as if he were saying "boots".  Turnbull suddenly gripped
his sword and said, shortly, "I see how you are placed quite
well, sir.  You will not call the police.  Mr. MacIan, shall we
engage?"  MacIan plucked his sword out of the grass.

"I must and will stop this shocking crime," cried the Tolstoian,
crimson in the face.  "It is against all modern ideas.  It is
against the principle of love.  How you, sir, who pretend to be a
Christian..."

MacIan turned upon him with a white face and bitter lip.  "Sir,"
he said, "talk about the principle of love as much as you like.
You seem to me colder than a lump of stone; but I am willing to
believe that you may at some time have loved a cat, or a dog, or
a child.  When you were a baby, I suppose you loved your mother.
Talk about love, then, till the world is sick of the word.  But
don't you talk about Christianity.  Don't you dare to say one
word, white or black, about it.  Christianity is, as far as you
are concerned, a horrible mystery.  Keep clear of it, keep silent
upon it, as you would upon an abomination.  It is a thing that has
made men slay and torture each other; and you will never know
why.  It is a thing that has made men do evil that good might
come; and you will never understand the evil, let alone the good.
Christianity is a thing that could only make you vomit, till you
are other than you are.  I would not justify it to you even if I
could.  Hate it, in God's name, as Turnbull does, who is a man.
It is a monstrous thing, for which men die.  And if you will stand
here and talk about love for another ten minutes it is very
probable that you will see a man die for it."

And he fell on guard.  Turnbull was busy settling something loose
in his elaborate hilt, and the pause was broken by the stranger.

"Suppose I call the police?" he said, with a heated face.

"And deny your most sacred dogma," said MacIan.

"Dogma!" cried the man, in a sort of dismay.  "Oh, we have no
_dogmas_, you know!"

There was another silence, and he said again, airily:

"You know, I think, there's something in what Shaw teaches about
no moral principles being quite fixed.  Have you ever read _The
Quintessence of Ibsenism_?  Of course he went very wrong over the
war."

Turnbull, with a bent, flushed face, was tying up the loose piece
of the pommel with string.  With the string in his teeth, he said,
"Oh, make up your damned mind and clear out!"

"It's a serious thing," said the philosopher, shaking his head.
"I must be alone and consider which is the higher point of view.
I rather feel that in a case so extreme as this..." and he went
slowly away.  As he disappeared among the trees, they heard him
murmuring in a sing-song voice, "New occasions teach new duties,"
out of a poem by James Russell Lowell.

"Ah," said MacIan, drawing a deep breath.  "Don't you believe in
prayer now?  I prayed for an angel."

"An hour ago," said the Highlander, in his heavy meditative
voice, "I felt the devil weakening my heart and my oath against
you, and I prayed that God would send an angel to my aid."

"Well?" inquired the other, finishing his mending and wrapping
the rest of the string round his hand to get a firmer grip.

"Well?"

"Well, that man was an angel," said MacIan.

"I didn't know they were as bad as that," answered Turnbull.

"We know that devils sometimes quote Scripture and counterfeit
good," replied the mystic.  "Why should not angels sometimes come
to show us the black abyss of evil on whose brink we stand.  If
that man had not tried to stop us...I might...I might have
stopped."

"I know what you mean," said Turnbull, grimly.

"But then he came," broke out MacIan, "and my soul said to me:
'Give up fighting, and you will become like That.  Give up vows
and dogmas, and fixed things, and you may grow like That.  You may
learn, also, that fog of false philosophy.  You may grow fond of
that mire of crawling, cowardly morals, and you may come to think
a blow bad, because it hurts, and not because it humiliates.  You
may come to think murder wrong, because it is violent, and not
because it is unjust.  Oh, you blasphemer of the good, an hour ago
I almost loved you!  But do not fear for me now.  I have heard the
word Love pronounced in _his_ intonation; and I know exactly what
it means. On guard!'"

The swords caught on each other with a dreadful clang and jar,
full of the old energy and hate; and at once plunged and
replunged.  Once more each man's heart had become the magnet of a
mad sword.  Suddenly, furious as they were, they were frozen for a
moment motionless.

"What noise is that?" asked the Highlander, hoarsely.

"I think I know," replied Turnbull.

"What?... What?" cried the other.

"The student of Shaw and Tolstoy has made up his remarkable
mind," said Turnbull, quietly.  "The police are coming up the
hill."



VI. THE OTHER PHILOSOPHER

Between high hedges in Hertfordshire, hedges so high as to create
a kind of grove, two men were running.  They did not run in a
scampering or feverish manner, but in the steady swing of the
pendulum.  Across the great plains and uplands to the right and
left of the lane, a long tide of sunset light rolled like a sea
of ruby, lighting up the long terraces of the hills and picking
out the few windows of the scattered hamlets in startling
blood-red sparks.  But the lane was cut deep in the hill and
remained in an abrupt shadow.  The two men running in it had an
impression not uncommonly experienced between those wild green
English walls; a sense of being led between the walls of a maze.

Though their pace was steady it was vigorous; their faces were
heated and their eyes fixed and bright.  There was, indeed,
something a little mad in the contrast between the evening's
stillness over the empty country-side, and these two figures
fleeing wildly from nothing.  They had the look of two lunatics,
possibly they were.

"Are you all right?" said Turnbull, with civility.  "Can you keep
this up?"

"Quite easily, thank you," replied MacIan.  "I run very well."

"Is that a qualification in a family of warriors?" asked
Turnbull.

"Undoubtedly.  Rapid movement is essential," answered MacIan, who
never saw a joke in his life.

Turnbull broke out into a short laugh, and silence fell between
them, the panting silence of runners.

Then MacIan said: "We run better than any of those policemen.
They are too fat.  Why do you make your policemen so fat?"

"I didn't do much towards making them fat myself," replied
Turnbull, genially, "but I flatter myself that I am now doing
something towards making them thin.  You'll see they will be as
lean as rakes by the time they catch us.  They will look like your
friend, Cardinal Manning."

"But they won't catch us," said MacIan, in his literal way.

"No, we beat them in the great military art of running away,"
returned the other.  "They won't catch us unless----"

MacIan turned his long equine face inquiringly.  "Unless what?" he
said, for Turnbull had gone silent suddenly, and seemed to be
listening intently as he ran as a horse does with his ears turned
back.

"Unless what?" repeated the Highlander.

"Unless they do--what they have done.  Listen."  MacIan slackened
his trot, and turned his head to the trail they had left behind
them.  Across two or three billows of the up and down lane came
along the ground the unmistakable throbbing of horses' hoofs.

"They have put the mounted police on us," said Turnbull, shortly.
"Good Lord, one would think we were a Revolution."

"So we are," said MacIan calmly.  "What shall we do? Shall we turn
on them with our points?"

"It may come to that," answered Turnbull, "though if it does, I
reckon that will be the last act.  We must put it off if we can."
And he stared and peered about him between the bushes.  "If we
could hide somewhere the beasts might go by us," he said.  "The
police have their faults, but thank God they're inefficient.  Why,
here's the very thing.  Be quick and quiet.  Follow me."

He suddenly swung himself up the high bank on one side of the
lane.  It was almost as high and smooth as a wall, and on the top
of it the black hedge stood out over them as an angle, almost
like a thatched roof of the lane.  And the burning evening sky
looked down at them through the tangle with red eyes as of an
army of goblins.

Turnbull hoisted himself up and broke the hedge with his body.  As
his head and shoulders rose above it they turned to flame in the
full glow as if lit up by an immense firelight.  His red hair and
beard looked almost scarlet, and his pale face as bright as a
boy's.  Something violent, something that was at once love and
hatred, surged in the strange heart of the Gael below him.  He had
an unutterable sense of epic importance, as if he were somehow
lifting all humanity into a prouder and more passionate region of
the air.  As he swung himself up also into the evening light he
felt as if he were rising on enormous wings.

Legends of the morning of the world which he had heard in
childhood or read in youth came back upon him in a cloudy
splendour, purple tales of wrath and friendship, like Roland and
Oliver, or Balin and Balan, reminding him of emotional
entanglements.  Men who had loved each other and then fought each
other; men who had fought each other and then loved each other,
together made a mixed but monstrous sense of momentousness.  The
crimson seas of the sunset seemed to him like a bursting out of
some sacred blood, as if the heart of the world had broken.

Turnbull was wholly unaffected by any written or spoken poetry;
his was a powerful and prosaic mind.  But even upon him there came
for the moment something out of the earth and the passionate ends
of the sky.  The only evidence was in his voice, which was still
practical but a shade more quiet.

"Do you see that summer-house-looking thing over there?" he asked
shortly.  "That will do for us very well."

Keeping himself free from the tangle of the hedge he strolled
across a triangle of obscure kitchen garden, and approached a
dismal shed or lodge a yard or two beyond it.  It was a
weather-stained hut of grey wood, which with all its desolation
retained a tag or two of trivial ornament, which suggested that
the thing had once been a sort of summer-house, and the place
probably a sort of garden.

"That is quite invisible from the road," said Turnbull, as he
entered it, "and it will cover us up for the night."

MacIan looked at him gravely for a few moments.  "Sir," he said,
"I ought to say something to you.  I ought to say----"

"Hush," said Turnbull, suddenly lifting his hand; "be still,
man."

In the sudden silence, the drumming of the distant horses grew
louder and louder with inconceivable rapidity, and the cavalcade
of police rushed by below them in the lane, almost with the roar
and rattle of an express train.

"I ought to tell you," continued MacIan, still staring stolidly
at the other, "that you are a great chief, and it is good to go
to war behind you."

Turnbull said nothing, but turned and looked out of the foolish
lattice of the little windows, then he said, "We must have food
and sleep first."

When the last echo of their eluded pursuers had died in the
distant uplands, Turnbull began to unpack the provisions with the
easy air of a man at a picnic.  He had just laid out the last
items, put a bottle of wine on the floor, and a tin of salmon on
the window-ledge, when the bottomless silence of that forgotten
place was broken.  And it was broken by three heavy blows of a
stick delivered upon the door.

Turnbull looked up in the act of opening a tin and stared
silently at his companion.  MacIan's long, lean mouth had shut
hard.

"Who the devil can that be?" said Turnbull.

"God knows," said the other.  "It might be God."

Again the sound of the wooden stick reverberated on the wooden
door.  It was a curious sound and on consideration did not
resemble the ordinary effects of knocking on a door for
admittance.  It was rather as if the point of a stick were plunged
again and again at the panels in an absurd attempt to make a hole
in them.

A wild look sprang into MacIan's eyes and he got up half
stupidly, with a kind of stagger, put his hand out and caught one
of the swords.  "Let us fight at once," he cried, "it is the end
of the world."

"You're overdone, MacIan," said Turnbull, putting him on one
side.  "It's only someone playing the goat.  Let me open the
door."

But he also picked up a sword as he stepped to open it.

He paused one moment with his hand on the handle and then flung
the door open.  Almost as he did so the ferrule of an ordinary
bamboo cane came at his eyes, so that he had actually to parry it
with the naked weapon in his hands.  As the two touched, the point
of the stick was dropped very abruptly, and the man with the
stick stepped hurriedly back.

Against the heraldic background of sprawling crimson and gold
offered him by the expiring sunset, the figure of the man with
the stick showed at first merely black and fantastic.  He was a
small man with two wisps of long hair that curled up on each
side, and seen in silhouette, looked like horns.  He had a bow tie
so big that the two ends showed on each side of his neck like
unnatural stunted wings.  He had his long black cane still tilted
in his hand like a fencing foil and half presented at the open
door.  His large straw hat had fallen behind him as he leapt
backwards.

"With reference to your suggestion, MacIan," said Turnbull,
placidly, "I think it looks more like the Devil."

"Who on earth are you?" cried the stranger in a high shrill
voice, brandishing his cane defensively.

"Let me see," said Turnbull, looking round to MacIan with the
same blandness.  "Who are we?"

"Come out," screamed the little man with the stick.

"Certainly," said Turnbull, and went outside with the sword,
MacIan following.

Seen more fully, with the evening light on his face, the strange
man looked a little less like a goblin.  He wore a square
pale-grey jacket suit, on which the grey butterfly tie was the
only indisputable touch of affectation.  Against the great sunset
his figure had looked merely small: seen in a more equal light it
looked tolerably compact and shapely.  His reddish-brown hair,
combed into two great curls, looked like the long, slow curling
hair of the women in some pre-Raphaelite pictures.  But within
this feminine frame of hair his face was unexpectedly impudent,
like a monkey's.

"What are you doing here?" he said, in a sharp small voice.

"Well," said MacIan, in his grave childish way, "what are _you_
doing here?"

"I," said the man, indignantly, "I'm in my own garden."

"Oh," said MacIan, simply, "I apologize."

Turnbull was coolly curling his red moustache, and the stranger
stared from one to the other, temporarily stunned by their
innocent assurance.

"But, may I ask," he said at last, "what the devil you are doing
in my summer-house?"

"Certainly," said MacIan. "We were just going to fight."

"To fight!" repeated the man.

"We had better tell this gentleman the whole business," broke in
Turnbull.  Then turning to the stranger he said firmly, "I am
sorry, sir, but we have something to do that must be done.  And I
may as well tell you at the beginning and to avoid waste of time
or language, that we cannot admit any interference."

"We were just going to take some slight refreshment when you
interrupted us..."

The little man had a dawning expression of understanding and
stooped and picked up the unused bottle of wine, eyeing it
curiously.

Turnbull continued:

"But that refreshment was preparatory to something which I fear
you will find less comprehensible, but on which our minds are
entirely fixed, sir.  We are forced to fight a duel.  We are forced
by honour and an internal intellectual need.  Do not, for your own
sake, attempt to stop us.  I know all the excellent and ethical
things that you will want to say to us.  I know all about the
essential requirements of civil order: I have written leading
articles about them all my life.  I know all about the sacredness
of human life; I have bored all my friends with it.  Try and
understand our position.  This man and I are alone in the modern
world in that we think that God is essentially important.  I think
He does not exist; that is where the importance comes in for me.
But this man thinks that He does exist, and thinking that very
properly thinks Him more important than anything else.  Now we
wish to make a great demonstration and assertion--something that
will set the world on fire like the first Christian persecutions.
If you like, we are attempting a mutual martyrdom.  The papers
have posted up every town against us.  Scotland Yard has fortified
every police station with our enemies; we are driven therefore to
the edge of a lonely lane, and indirectly to taking liberties
with your summer-house in order to arrange our..."

"Stop!" roared the little man in the butterfly necktie.  "Put me
out of my intellectual misery.  Are you really the two tomfools I
have read of in all the papers?  Are you the two people who wanted
to spit each other in the Police Court?  Are you?  Are you?"

"Yes," said MacIan, "it began in a Police Court."

The little man slung the bottle of wine twenty yards away like a
stone.

"Come up to my place," he said.  "I've got better stuff than that.
I've got the best Beaune within fifty miles of here.  Come up.
You're the very men I wanted to see."

Even Turnbull, with his typical invulnerability, was a little
taken aback by this boisterous and almost brutal hospitality.

"Why...sir..." he began.

"Come up!  Come in!" howled the little man, dancing with delight.
"I'll give you a dinner.  I'll give you a bed!  I'll give you a
green smooth lawn and your choice of swords and pistols.  Why, you
fools, I adore fighting!  It's the only good thing in God's world!
I've walked about these damned fields and longed to see somebody
cut up and killed and the blood running.  Ha!  Ha!"

And he made sudden lunges with his stick at the trunk of a
neighbouring tree so that the ferrule made fierce prints and
punctures in the bark.

"Excuse me," said MacIan suddenly with the wide-eyed curiosity of
a child, "excuse me, but..."

"Well?" said the small fighter, brandishing his wooden weapon.

"Excuse me," repeated MacIan, "but was that what you were doing
at the door?"

The little man stared an instant and then said: "Yes," and
Turnbull broke into a guffaw.

"Come on!" cried the little man, tucking his stick under his arm
and taking quite suddenly to his heels.  "Come on!  Confound me,
I'll see both of you eat and then I'll see one of you die.  Lord
bless me, the gods must exist after all--they have sent me one of
my day-dreams!  Lord!  A duel!"

He had gone flying along a winding path between the borders of
the kitchen garden, and in the increasing twilight he was as hard
to follow as a flying hare.  But at length the path after many
twists betrayed its purpose and led abruptly up two or three
steps to the door of a tiny but very clean cottage.  There was
nothing about the outside to distinguish it from other cottages,
except indeed its ominous cleanliness and one thing that was out
of all the custom and tradition of all cottages under the sun.
In the middle of the little garden among the stocks and marigolds
there surged up in shapeless stone a South Sea Island idol.  There
was something gross and even evil in that eyeless and alien god
among the most innocent of the English flowers.

"Come in!" cried the creature again.  "Come in! it's better
inside!"

Whether or no it was better inside it was at least a surprise.
The moment the two duellists had pushed open the door of that
inoffensive, whitewashed cottage they found that its interior was
lined with fiery gold.  It was like stepping into a chamber in the
Arabian Nights.  The door that closed behind them shut out England
and all the energies of the West.  The ornaments that shone and
shimmered on every side of them were subtly mixed from many
periods and lands, but were all oriental.  Cruel Assyrian
bas-reliefs ran along the sides of the passage; cruel Turkish
swords and daggers glinted above and below them; the two were
separated by ages and fallen civilizations.  Yet they seemed to
sympathize since they were both harmonious and both merciless.
The house seemed to consist of chamber within chamber and created
that impression as of a dream which belongs also to the Arabian
Nights themselves.  The innermost room of all was like the inside
of a jewel.  The little man who owned it all threw himself on a
heap of scarlet and golden cushions and struck his hands
together.  A negro in a white robe and turban appeared suddenly
and silently behind them.

"Selim," said the host, "these two gentlemen are staying with me
tonight.  Send up the very best wine and dinner at once.  And
Selim, one of these gentlemen will probably die tomorrow.  Make
arrangements, please."

The negro bowed and withdrew.

Evan MacIan came out the next morning into the little garden to a
fresh silver day, his long face looking more austere than ever in
that cold light, his eyelids a little heavy.  He carried one of
the swords.  Turnbull was in the little house behind him,
demolishing the end of an early breakfast and humming a tune to
himself, which could be heard through the open window.  A moment
or two later he leapt to his feet and came out into the sunlight,
still munching toast, his own sword stuck under his arm like a
walking-stick.

Their eccentric host had vanished from sight, with a polite
gesture, some twenty minutes before.  They imagined him to be
occupied on some concerns in the interior of the house, and they
waited for his emergence, stamping the garden in silence--the
garden of tall, fresh country flowers, in the midst of which the
monstrous South Sea idol lifted itself as abruptly as the prow of
a ship riding on a sea of red and white and gold.

It was with a start, therefore, that they came upon the man
himself already in the garden.  They were all the more startled
because of the still posture in which they found him.  He was on
his knees in front of the stone idol, rigid and motionless, like
a saint in a trance or ecstasy.  Yet when Turnbull's tread broke a
twig, he was on his feet in a flash.

"Excuse me," he said with an irradiation of smiles, but yet with
a kind of bewilderment.  "So sorry...family prayers...old
fashioned...mother's knee.  Let us go on to the lawn behind."

And he ducked rapidly round the statue to an open space of grass
on the other side of it.

"This will do us best, Mr. MacIan," said he.  Then he made a
gesture towards the heavy stone figure on the pedestal which had
now its blank and shapeless back turned towards them.  "Don't you
be afraid," he added, "he can still see us."

MacIan turned his blue, blinking eyes, which seemed still misty
with sleep (or sleeplessness) towards the idol, but his brows
drew together.

The little man with the long hair also had his eyes on the back
view of the god.  His eyes were at once liquid and burning, and he
rubbed his hands slowly against each other.

"Do you know," he said, "I think he can see us better this way.
I often think that this blank thing is his real face, watching,
though it cannot be watched.  He! he!  Yes, I think he looks nice
from behind.  He looks more cruel from behind, don't you think?"

"What the devil is the thing?" asked Turnbull gruffly.

"It is the only Thing there is," answered the other.  "It is
Force."

"Oh!" said Turnbull shortly.

"Yes, my friends," said the little man, with an animated
countenance, fluttering his fingers in the air, "it was no chance
that led you to this garden; surely it was the caprice of some
old god, some happy, pitiless god.  Perhaps it was his will, for
he loves blood; and on that stone in front of him men have been
butchered by hundreds in the fierce, feasting islands of the
South.  In this cursed, craven place I have not been permitted to
kill men on his altar.  Only rabbits and cats, sometimes."

In the stillness MacIan made a sudden movement, unmeaning
apparently, and then remained rigid.

"But today, today," continued the small man in a shrill voice.
"Today his hour is come.  Today his will is done on earth as it
is in heaven.  Men, men, men will bleed before him today."  And
he bit his forefinger in a kind of fever.

Still, the two duellists stood with their swords as heavily as
statues, and the silence seemed to cool the eccentric and call
him back to more rational speech.

"Perhaps I express myself a little too lyrically," he said with
an amicable abruptness.  "My philosophy has its higher ecstasies,
but perhaps you are hardly worked up to them yet.  Let us confine
ourselves to the unquestioned.  You have found your way,
gentlemen, by a beautiful accident, to the house of the only man
in England (probably) who will favour and encourage your most
reasonable project.  From Cornwall to Cape Wrath this county is
one horrible, solid block of humanitarianism.  You will find men
who will defend this or that war in a distant continent.  They
will defend it on the contemptible ground of commerce or the more
contemptible ground of social good.  But do not fancy that you
will find one other person who will comprehend a strong man
taking the sword in his hand and wiping out his enemy.  My name
is Wimpey, Morrice Wimpey.  I had a Fellowship at Magdalen.  But I
assure you I had to drop it, owing to my having said something in
a public lecture infringing the popular prejudice against those
great gentlemen, the assassins of the Italian Renaissance.  They
let me say it at dinner and so on, and seemed to like it.  But in
a public lecture...so inconsistent.  Well, as I say, here is your
only refuge and temple of honour.  Here you can fall back on that
naked and awful arbitration which is the only thing that balances
the stars--a still, continuous violence.  _Vae Victis!_  Down,
down, down with the defeated!  Victory is the only ultimate fact.
Carthage _was_ destroyed, the Red Indians are being exterminated:
that is the single certainty.  In an hour from now that sun will
still be shining and that grass growing, and one of you will be
conquered; one of you will be the conqueror.  When it has been
done, nothing will alter it.  Heroes, I give you the hospitality
fit for heroes.  And I salute the survivor.  Fall on!"

The two men took their swords.  Then MacIan said steadily: "Mr.
Turnbull, lend me your sword a moment."

Turnbull, with a questioning glance, handed him the weapon.
MacIan took the second sword in his left hand and, with a violent
gesture, hurled it at the feet of little Mr. Wimpey.

"Fight!" he said in a loud, harsh voice.  "Fight me now!"

Wimpey took a step backward, and bewildered words bubbled on his
lips.

"Pick up that sword and fight me," repeated MacIan, with brows as
black as thunder.

The little man turned to Turnbull with a gesture, demanding
judgement or protection.

"Really, sir," he began, "this gentleman confuses..."

"You stinking little coward," roared Turnbull, suddenly releasing
his wrath.  "Fight, if you're so fond of fighting!  Fight, if
you're so fond of all that filthy philosophy!  If winning is
everything, go in and win!  If the weak must go to the wall, go to
the wall!  Fight, you rat!  Fight, or if you won't fight--run!"

And he ran at Wimpey, with blazing eyes.

Wimpey staggered back a few paces like a man struggling with his
own limbs.  Then he felt the furious Scotchman coming at him like
an express train, doubling his size every second, with eyes as
big as windows and a sword as bright as the sun.  Something broke
inside him, and he found himself running away, tumbling over his
own feet in terror, and crying out as he ran.

"Chase him!" shouted Turnbull as MacIan snatched up the sword and
joined in the scamper.  "Chase him over a county!  Chase him into
the sea!  Shoo!  Shoo!  Shoo!"

The little man plunged like a rabbit among the tall flowers, the
two duellists after him.  Turnbull kept at his tail with savage
ecstasy, still shooing him like a cat.  But MacIan, as he ran past
the South Sea idol, paused an instant to spring upon its
pedestal.  For five seconds he strained against the inert mass.
Then it stirred; and he sent it over with a great crash among the
flowers, that engulfed it altogether.  Then he went bounding after
the runaway.

In the energy of his alarm the ex-Fellow of Magdalen managed to
leap the paling of his garden.  The two pursuers went over it
after him like flying birds.  He fled frantically down a long lane
with his two terrors on his trail till he came to a gap in the
hedge and went across a steep meadow like the wind.  The two
Scotchmen, as they ran, kept up a cheery bellowing and waved
their swords.  Up three slanting meadows, down four slanting
meadows on the other side, across another road, across a heath of
snapping bracken, through a wood, across another road, and to the
brink of a big pool, they pursued the flying philosopher.  But
when he came to the pool his pace was so precipitate that he
could not stop it, and with a kind of lurching stagger, he fell
splash into the greasy water.  Getting dripping to his feet, with
the water up to his knees, the worshipper of force and victory
waded disconsolately to the other side and drew himself on to the
bank.  And Turnbull sat down on the grass and went off into
reverberations of laughter.  A second afterwards the most
extraordinary grimaces were seen to distort the stiff face of
MacIan, and unholy sounds came from within.  He had never
practised laughing, and it hurt him very much.



VII. THE VILLAGE OF GRASSLEY-IN-THE-HOLE

At about half past one, under a strong blue sky, Turnbull got up
out of the grass and fern in which he had been lying, and his
still intermittent laughter ended in a kind of yawn.

"I'm hungry," he said shortly. "Are you?"

"I have not noticed," answered MacIan.  "What are you going to
do?"

"There's a village down the road, past the pool," answered
Turnbull.  "I can see it from here.  I can see the whitewashed
walls of some cottages and a kind of corner of the church.  How
jolly it all looks.  It looks so--I don't know what the word
is--so sensible.  Don't fancy I'm under any illusions about
Arcadian virtue and the innocent villagers.  Men make beasts of
themselves there with drink, but they don't deliberately make
devils of themselves with mere talking.  They kill wild animals in
the wild woods, but they don't kill cats to the God of Victory.
They don't----"  He broke off and suddenly spat on the ground.

"Excuse me," he said; "it was ceremonial.  One has to get the
taste out of one's mouth."

"The taste of what?" asked MacIan.

"I don't know the exact name for it," replied Turnbull.  "Perhaps
it is the South Sea Islands, or it may be Magdalen College."

There was a long pause, and MacIan also lifted his large limbs
off the ground--his eyes particularly dreamy.

"I know what you mean, Turnbull," he said, "but...I always
thought you people agreed with all that."

"With all that about doing as one likes, and the individual, and
Nature loving the strongest, and all the things which that
cockroach talked about."

Turnbull's big blue-grey eyes stood open with a grave
astonishment.

"Do you really mean to say, MacIan," he said, "that you fancied
that we, the Free-thinkers, that Bradlaugh, or Holyoake, or
Ingersoll, believe all that dirty, immoral mysticism about
Nature?  Damn Nature!"

"I supposed you did," said MacIan calmly.  "It seems to me your
most conclusive position."

"And you mean to tell me," rejoined the other, "that you broke my
window, and challenged me to mortal combat, and tied a tradesman
up with ropes, and chased an Oxford Fellow across five
meadows--all under the impression that I am such an illiterate
idiot as to believe in Nature!"

"I supposed you did," repeated MacIan with his usual mildness;
"but I admit that I know little of the details of your belief--or
disbelief."

Turnbull swung round quite suddenly, and set off towards the
village.

"Come along," he cried.  "Come down to the village.  Come down to
the nearest decent inhabitable pub.  This is a case for beer."

"I do not quite follow you," said the Highlander.

"Yes, you do," answered Turnbull.  "You follow me slap into the
inn-parlour.  I repeat, this is a case for beer.  We must have the
whole of this matter out thoroughly before we go a step farther.
Do you know that an idea has just struck me of great simplicity
and of some cogency.  Do not by any means let us drop our
intentions of settling our differences with two steel swords.
But do you not think that with two pewter pots we might do what
we really have never thought of doing yet--discover what our
difference is?"

"It never occurred to me before," answered MacIan with
tranquillity.  "It is a good suggestion."

And they set out at an easy swing down the steep road to the
village of Grassley-in-the-Hole.

Grassley-in-the-Hole was a rude parallelogram of buildings, with
two thoroughfares which might have been called two high streets
if it had been possible to call them streets.  One of these ways
was higher on the slope than the other, the whole parallelogram
lying aslant, so to speak, on the side of the hill.  The upper of
these two roads was decorated with a big public house, a
butcher's shop, a small public house, a sweetstuff shop, a very
small public house, and an illegible signpost.  The lower of the
two roads boasted a horse-pond, a post office, a gentleman's
garden with very high hedges, a microscopically small public
house, and two cottages.  Where all the people lived who supported
all the public houses was in this, as in many other English
villages, a silent and smiling mystery.  The church lay a little
above and beyond the village, with a square grey tower dominating
it decisively.

But even the church was scarcely so central and solemn an
institution as the large public house, the Valencourt Arms.  It
was named after some splendid family that had long gone bankrupt,
and whose seat was occupied by a man who had invented a hygienic
bootjack; but the unfathomable sentimentalism of the English
people insisted in regarding the Inn, the seat and the sitter in
it, as alike parts of a pure and marmoreal antiquity.  And in the
Valencourt Arms festivity itself had some solemnity and decorum;
and beer was drunk with reverence, as it ought to be.  Into the
principal parlour of this place entered two strangers, who found
themselves, as is always the case in such hostels, the object,
not of fluttered curiosity or pert inquiry, but of steady,
ceaseless, devouring ocular study.  They had long coats down to
their heels, and carried under each coat something that looked
like a stick.  One was tall and dark, the other short and
red-haired.  They ordered a pot of ale each.

"MacIan," said Turnbull, lifting his tankard, "the fool who
wanted us to be friends made us want to go on fighting.  It is
only natural that the fool who wanted us to fight should make us
friendly.  MacIan, your health!"

Dusk was already dropping, the rustics in the tavern were already
lurching and lumbering out of it by twos and threes, crying
clamorous good nights to a solitary old toper that remained,
before MacIan and Turnbull had reached the really important part
of their discussion.

MacIan wore an expression of sad bewilderment not uncommon with
him.  "I am to understand, then," he said, "that you don't believe
in nature."

"You may say so in a very special and emphatic sense," said
Turnbull.  "I do not believe in nature, just as I do not believe
in Odin.  She is a myth.  It is not merely that I do not believe
that nature can guide us.  It is that I do not believe that nature
exists."

"Exists?" said MacIan in his monotonous way, settling his pewter
pot on the table.

"Yes, in a real sense nature does not exist.  I mean that nobody
can discover what the original nature of things would have been
if things had not interfered with it.  The first blade of grass
began to tear up the earth and eat it; it was interfering with
nature, if there is any nature.  The first wild ox began to tear
up the grass and eat it; he was interfering with nature, if there
is any nature.  In the same way," continued Turnbull, "the human
when it asserts its dominance over nature is just as natural as
the thing which it destroys."

"And in the same way," said MacIan almost dreamily, "the
superhuman, the supernatural is just as natural as the nature
which it destroys."

Turnbull took his head out of his pewter pot in some anger.

"The supernatural, of course," he said, "is quite another thing;
the case of the supernatural is simple.  The supernatural does not
exist."

"Quite so," said MacIan in a rather dull voice; "you said the
same about the natural.  If the natural does not exist the
supernatural obviously can't."  And he yawned a little over his
ale.

Turnbull turned for some reason a little red and remarked
quickly, "That may be jolly clever, for all I know.  But everyone
does know that there is a division between the things that as a
matter of fact do commonly happen and the things that don't.
Things that break the evident laws of nature----"

"Which does not exist," put in MacIan sleepily.  Turnbull struck
the table with a sudden hand.

"Good Lord in heaven!" he cried----

"Who does not exist," murmured MacIan.

"Good Lord in heaven!" thundered Turnbull, without regarding the
interruption.  "Do you really mean to sit there and say that you,
like anybody else, would not recognize the difference between a
natural occurrence and a supernatural one--if there could be such
