
"We are detaining the lady," said Count Gregory, with politeness;
and, making a gesture suggesting that he would have taken off his
hat if he had had one, he strode away up the avenue of trees and
eventually disappeared.  He was so complete an aristocrat that he
could offer his back to them all the way up that avenue; and his
back never once looked uncomfortable.

"You must allow me to see you home," said Bert to the girl, in a
gruff and almost stifled voice; "I think we have only a little
way to go."

"Only a little way," she said, and smiled once more that night,
in spite of fatigue and fear and the world and the flesh and the
devil.  The glowing and transparent blue of twilight had long been
covered by the opaque and slatelike blue of night, when he
handed her into the lamp-lit interior of her home.  He went out
himself into the darkness, walking sturdily, but tearing at his
black beard.

All the French or semi-French gentry of the district considered
this a case in which a duel was natural and inevitable, and
neither party had any difficulty in finding seconds, strangers as
they were in the place.  Two small landowners, who were careful,
practising Catholics, willingly undertook to represent that
strict church-goer Camille Burt; while the profligate but
apparently powerful Count Gregory found friends in an energetic
local doctor who was ready for social promotion and an accidental
Californian tourist who was ready for anything.  As no particular
purpose could be served by delay, it was arranged that the affair
should fall out three days afterwards.  And when this was settled
the whole community, as it were, turned over again in bed and
thought no more about the matter.  At least there was only one
member of it who seemed to be restless, and that was she who was
commonly most restful.  On the next night Madeleine Durand went to
church as usual; and as usual the stricken Camille was there
also.  What was not so usual was that when they were a bow-shot
from the church Madeleine turned round and walked back to him.
"Sir," she began, "it is not wrong of me to speak to you," and
the very words gave him a jar of unexpected truth; for in all the
novels he had ever read she would have begun: "It is wrong of me
to speak to you."  She went on with wide and serious eyes like an
animal's: "It is not wrong of me to speak to you, because your
soul, or anybody's soul, matters so much more than what the world
says about anybody.  I want to talk to you about what you are
going to do."

Bert saw in front of him the inevitable heroine of the novels
trying to prevent bloodshed; and his pale firm face became
implacable.

"I would do anything but that for you," he said; "but no man can
be called less than a man."

She looked at him for a moment with a face openly puzzled, and
then broke into an odd and beautiful half-smile.

"Oh, I don't mean that," she said; "I don't talk about what I
don't understand.  No one has ever hit me; and if they had I
should not feel as a man may.  I am sure it is not the best thing
to fight.  It would be better to forgive--if one could really
forgive.  But when people dine with my father and say that
fighting a duel is mere murder--of course I can see that is not
just.  It's all so different--having a reason--and letting the
other man know--and using the same guns and things--and doing it
in front of your friends.  I'm awfully stupid, but I know that men
like you aren't murderers.  But it wasn't that that I meant."

"What did you mean?" asked the other, looking broodingly at the
earth.

"Don't you know," she said, "there is only one more celebration?
I thought that as you always go to church--I thought you would
communicate this morning."

Bert stepped backward with a sort of action she had never seen in
him before.  It seemed to alter his whole body.

"You may be right or wrong to risk dying," said the girl, simply;
"the poor women in our village risk it whenever they have a baby.
You men are the other half of the world.  I know nothing about
when you ought to die.  But surely if you are daring to try and
find God beyond the grave and appeal to Him--you ought to let Him
find you when He comes and stands there every morning in our
little church."

And placid as she was, she made a little gesture of argument, of
which the pathos wrung the heart.

M. Camille Bert was by no means placid.  Before that incomplete
gesture and frankly pleading face he retreated as if from the
jaws of a dragon.  His dark black hair and beard looked utterly
unnatural against the startling pallor of his face.  When at last
he said something it was: "O God!  I can't stand this!"  He did not
say it in French.  Nor did he, strictly speaking, say it in
English.  The truth (interesting only to anthropologists) is that
he said it in Scotch.

"There will be another mass in a matter of eight hours," said
Madeleine, with a sort of business eagerness and energy, "and you
can do it then before the fighting.  You must forgive me, but I
was so frightened that you would not do it at all."

Bert seemed to crush his teeth together until they broke, and
managed to say between them: "And why should you suppose that I
shouldn't do as you say--I mean not to do it at all?"

"You always go to Mass," answered the girl, opening her wide blue
eyes, "and the Mass is very long and tiresome unless one loves
God."

Then it was that Bert exploded with a brutality which might have
come from Count Gregory, his criminal opponent.  He advanced upon
Madeleine with flaming eyes, and almost took her by the two
shoulders.  "I do not love God," he cried, speaking French with
the broadest Scotch accent; "I do not want to find Him; I do not
think He is there to be found.  I must burst up the show; I must
and will say everything.  You are the happiest and honestest thing
I ever saw in this godless universe.  And I am the dirtiest and
most dishonest."

Madeleine looked at him doubtfully for an instant, and then said
with a sudden simplicity and cheerfulness: "Oh, but if you are
really sorry it is all right.  If you are horribly sorry it is all
the better.  You have only to go and tell the priest so and he
will give you God out of his own hands."

"I hate your priest and I deny your God!" cried the man, "and I
tell you God is a lie and a fable and a mask.  And for the first
time in my life I do not feel superior to God."

"What can it all mean?" said Madeleine, in massive wonder.

"Because I am a fable also and a mask," said the man.  He had been
plucking fiercely at his black beard and hair all the time; now
he suddenly plucked them off and flung them like moulted feathers
in the mire.  This extraordinary spoliation left in the sunlight
the same face, but a much younger head--a head with close
chestnut curls and a short chestnut beard.

"Now you know the truth," he answered, with hard eyes.  "I am a
cad who has played a crooked trick on a quiet village and a
decent woman for a private reason of his own.  I might have played
it successfully on any other woman; I have hit the one woman on
whom it cannot be played.  It's just like my damned luck.  The
plain truth is," and here when he came to the plain truth he
boggled and blundered as Evan had done in telling it to the girl
in the motor-car.

"The plain truth is," he said at last, "that I am James Turnbull
the atheist.  The police are after me; not for atheism but for
being ready to fight for it."

"I saw something about you in a newspaper," said the girl, with a
simplicity which even surprise could never throw off its balance.

"Evan MacIan said there was a God," went on the other,
stubbornly, "and I say there isn't.  And I have come to fight for
the fact that there is no God; it is for that that I have seen
this cursed island and your blessed face."

"You want me really to believe," said Madeleine, with parted
lips, "that you think----"

"I want you to hate me!" cried Turnbull, in agony.  "I want you to
be sick when you think of my name.  I am sure there is no God."

"But there is," said Madeleine, quite quietly, and rather with
the air of one telling children about an elephant.  "Why, I
touched His body only this morning."

"You touched a bit of bread," said Turnbull, biting his knuckles.
"Oh, I will say anything that can madden you!"

"You think it is only a bit of bread," said the girl, and her
lips tightened ever so little.

"I know it is only a bit of bread," said Turnbull, with violence.

She flung back her open face and smiled.  "Then why did you refuse
to eat it?" she said.

James Turnbull made a little step backward, and for the first
time in his life there seemed to break out and blaze in his head
thoughts that were not his own.

"Why, how silly of them," cried out Madeleine, with quite a
schoolgirl gaiety, "why, how silly of them to call _you_ a
blasphemer!  Why, you have wrecked your whole business because you
would not commit blasphemy."

The man stood, a somewhat comic figure in his tragic
bewilderment, with the honest red head of James Turnbull sticking
out of the rich and fictitious garments of Camille Bert.  But the
startled pain of his face was strong enough to obliterate the
oddity.

"You come down here," continued the lady, with that female
emphasis which is so pulverizing in conversation and so feeble at
a public meeting, "you and your MacIan come down here and put on
false beards or noses in order to fight.  You pretend to be a
Catholic commercial traveller from France.  Poor Mr. MacIan has to
pretend to be a dissolute nobleman from nowhere.  Your scheme
succeeds; you pick a quite convincing quarrel; you arrange a
quite respectable duel; the duel you have planned so long will
come off tomorrow with absolute certainty and safety.  And then
you throw off your wig and throw up your scheme and throw over
your colleague, because I ask you to go into a building and eat a
bit of bread.  And _then_ you dare to tell me that you are sure
there is nothing watching us.  Then you say you know there is
nothing on the very altar you run away from.  You know----"

"I only know," said Turnbull, "that I must run away from you.
This has got beyond any talking."  And he plunged along into the
village, leaving his black wig and beard lying behind him on the
road.

As the market-place opened before him he saw Count Gregory, that
distinguished foreigner, standing and smoking in elegant
meditation at the corner of the local café.  He immediately made
his way rapidly towards him, considering that a consultation was
urgent.  But he had hardly crossed half of that stony quadrangle
when a window burst open above him and a head was thrust out,
shouting.  The man was in his woollen undershirt, but Turnbull
knew the energetic, apologetic head of the sergeant of police.  He
pointed furiously at Turnbull and shouted his name.  A policeman
ran excitedly from under an archway and tried to collar him.  Two
men selling vegetables dropped their baskets and joined in the
chase.  Turnbull dodged the constable, upset one of the men into
his own basket, and bounding towards the distinguished foreign
Count, called to him clamorously: "Come on, MacIan, the hunt is
up again."

The prompt reply of Count Gregory was to pull off his large
yellow whiskers and scatter them on the breeze with an air of
considerable relief.  Then he joined the flight of Turnbull, and
even as he did so, with one wrench of his powerful hands rent and
split the strange, thick stick that he carried.  Inside it was a
naked old-fashioned rapier.  The two got a good start up the road
before the whole town was awakened behind them; and half-way up
it a similar transformation was seen to take place in Mr.
Turnbull's singular umbrella.

The two had a long race for the harbour; but the English police
were heavy and the French inhabitants were indifferent.  In any
case, they got used to the notion of the road being clear; and
just as they had come to the cliffs MacIan banged into another
gentleman with unmistakable surprise.  How he knew he was another
gentleman merely by banging into him, must remain a mystery.
MacIan was a very poor and very sober Scotch gentleman.  The other
was a very drunk and very wealthy English gentleman.  But there
was something in the staggered and openly embarrassed apologies
that made them understand each other as readily and as quickly
and as much as two men talking French in the middle of China.  The
nearest expression of the type is that it either hits or
apologizes; and in this case both apologized.

"You seem to be in a hurry," said the unknown Englishman, falling
back a step or two in order to laugh with an unnatural
heartiness.  "What's it all about, eh?"  Then before MacIan could
get past his sprawling and staggering figure he ran forward again
and said with a sort of shouting and ear-shattering whisper: "I
say, my name is Wilkinson.  _You_ know--Wilkinson's Entire was my
grandfather.  Can't drink beer myself.  Liver."  And he shook his
head with extraordinary sagacity.

"We really are in a hurry, as you say," said MacIan, summoning a
sufficiently pleasant smile, "so if you will let us pass----"

"I'll tell you what, you fellows," said the sprawling gentleman,
confidentially, while Evan's agonized ears heard behind him the
first paces of the pursuit, "if you really are, as you say, in a
hurry, I know what it is to be in a hurry--Lord, what a hurry I
was in when we all came out of Cartwright's rooms--if you really
are in a hurry"--and he seemed to steady his voice into a sort of
solemnity--"if you are in a hurry, there's nothing like a good
yacht for a man in a hurry."

"No doubt you're right," said MacIan, and dashed past him in
despair.  The head of the pursuing host was just showing over the
top of the hill behind him.  Turnbull had already ducked under the
intoxicated gentleman's elbow and fled far in front.

"No, but look here," said Mr. Wilkinson, enthusiastically running
after MacIan and catching him by the sleeve of his coat.  "If you
want to hurry you should take a yacht, and if"--he said, with a
burst of rationality, like one leaping to a further point in
logic--"if you want a yacht--you can have mine."

Evan pulled up abruptly and looked back at him.  "We are really in
the devil of a hurry," he said, "and if you really have a yacht,
the truth is that we would give our ears for it."

"You'll find it in harbour," said Wilkinson, struggling with his
speech.  "Left side of harbour--called _Gibson Girl_--can't think
why, old fellow, I never lent it you before."

With these words the benevolent Mr. Wilkinson fell flat on his
face in the road, but continued to laugh softly, and turned
towards his flying companion a face of peculiar peace and
benignity.  Evan's mind went through a crisis of instantaneous
casuistry, in which it may be that he decided wrongly; but about
how he decided his biographer can profess no doubt.  Two minutes
afterwards he had overtaken Turnbull and told the tale; ten
minutes afterwards he and Turnbull had somehow tumbled into the
yacht called the _Gibson Girl_ and had somehow pushed off from
the Isle of St. Loup.



XII. THE DESERT ISLAND

Those who happen to hold the view (and Mr. Evan MacIan, now alive
and comfortable, is among the number) that something
supernatural, some eccentric kindness from god or fairy had
guided our adventurers through all their absurd perils, might
have found his strongest argument perhaps in their management or
mismanagement of Mr. Wilkinson's yacht.  Neither of them had the
smallest qualification for managing such a vessel; but MacIan had
a practical knowledge of the sea in much smaller and quite
different boats, while Turnbull had an abstract knowledge of
science and some of its applications to navigation, which was
worse.  The presence of the god or fairy can only be deduced from
the fact that they never definitely ran into anything, either a
boat, a rock, a quicksand, or a man-of-war.  Apart from this
negative description, their voyage would be difficult to
describe.  It took at least a fortnight, and MacIan, who was
certainly the shrewder sailor of the two, realized that they were
sailing west into the Atlantic and were probably by this time
past the Scilly Isles.  How much farther they stood out into the
western sea it was impossible to conjecture.  But they felt
certain, at least, that they were far enough into that awful gulf
between us and America to make it unlikely that they would soon
see land again.  It was therefore with legitimate excitement that
one rainy morning after daybreak they saw that distinct shape of
a solitary island standing up against the encircling strip of
silver which ran round the skyline and separated the grey and
green of the billows from the grey and mauve of the morning
clouds.

"What can it be?" cried MacIan, in a dry-throated excitement.  "I
didn't know there were any Atlantic islands so far beyond the
Scillies--Good Lord, it can't be Madeira, yet?"

"I thought you were fond of legends and lies and fables," said
Turnbull, grimly.  "Perhaps it's Atlantis."

"Of course, it might be," answered the other, quite innocently
and gravely; "but I never thought the story about Atlantis was
very solidly established."

"Whatever it is, we are running on to it," said Turnbull,
equably, "and we shall be shipwrecked twice, at any rate."

The naked-looking nose of land projecting from the unknown island
was, indeed, growing larger and larger, like the trunk of some
terrible and advancing elephant.  There seemed to be nothing in
particular, at least on this side of the island, except shoals of
shellfish lying so thick as almost to make it look like one of
those toy grottos that the children make.  In one place, however,
the coast offered a soft, smooth bay of sand, and even the
rudimentary ingenuity of the two amateur mariners managed to run
up the little ship with her prow well on shore and her bowsprit
pointing upward, as in a sort of idiotic triumph.

They tumbled on shore and began to unload the vessel, setting the
stores out in rows upon the sand with something of the solemnity
of boys playing at pirates.  There were Mr. Wilkinson's
cigar-boxes and Mr. Wilkinson's dozen of champagne and Mr.
Wilkinson's tinned salmon and Mr. Wilkinson's tinned tongue and
Mr. Wilkinson's tinned sardines, and every sort of preserved
thing that could be seen at the Army and Navy stores.  Then MacIan
stopped with a jar of pickles in his hand and said abruptly:

"I don't know why we're doing all this; I suppose we ought really
to fall to and get it over."

Then he added more thoughtfully: "Of course this island seems
rather bare and the survivor----"

"The question is," said Turnbull, with cheerful speculation,
"whether the survivor will be in a proper frame of mind for
potted prawns."

MacIan looked down at the rows of tins and bottles, and the cloud
of doubt still lowered upon his face.

"You will permit me two liberties, my dear sir," said Turnbull at
last: "The first is to break open this box and light one of Mr.
Wilkinson's excellent cigars, which will, I am sure, assist my
meditations; the second is to offer a penny for your thoughts; or
rather to convulse the already complex finances of this island by
betting a penny that I know them."

"What on earth are you talking about?" asked MacIan, listlessly,
in the manner of an inattentive child.

"I know what you are really thinking, MacIan," repeated Turnbull,
laughing.  "I know what I am thinking, anyhow.  And I rather fancy
it's the same."

"What are you thinking?" asked Evan.

"I am thinking and you are thinking," said Turnbull, "that it is
damned silly to waste all that champagne."

Something like the spectre of a smile appeared on the unsmiling
visage of the Gael; and he made at least no movement of dissent.

"We could drink all the wine and smoke all the cigars easily in a
week," said Turnbull; "and that would be to die feasting like
heroes."

"Yes, and there is something else," said MacIan, with slight
hesitation.  "You see, we are on an almost unknown rock, lost in
the Atlantic.  The police will never catch us; but then neither
may the public ever hear of us; and that was one of the things we
wanted."  Then, after a pause, he said, drawing in the sand with
his sword-point: "She may never hear of it at all."

"Well?" inquired the other, puffing at his cigar.

"Well," said MacIan, "we might occupy a day or two in drawing up
a thorough and complete statement of what we did and why we did
it, and all about both our points of view.  Then we could leave
one copy on the island whatever happens to us and put another in
an empty bottle and send it out to sea, as they do in the books."

"A good idea," said Turnbull, "and now let us finish unpacking."

As MacIan, a tall, almost ghostly figure, paced along the edge of
sand that ran round the islet, the purple but cloudy poetry which
was his native element was piled up at its thickest upon his
soul.  The unique island and the endless sea emphasized the thing
solely as an epic.  There were no ladies or policemen here to give
him a hint either of its farce or its tragedy.

"Perhaps when the morning stars were made," he said to himself,
"God built this island up from the bottom of the world to be a
tower and a theatre for the fight between yea and nay."

Then he wandered up to the highest level of the rock, where there
was a roof or plateau of level stone.  Half an hour afterwards,
Turnbull found him clearing away the loose sand from this
table-land and making it smooth and even.

"We will fight up here, Turnbull," said MacIan, "when the time
comes.  And till the time comes this place shall be sacred."

"I thought of having lunch up here," said Turnbull, who had a
bottle of champagne in his hand.

"No, no--not up here," said MacIan, and came down from the height
quite hastily.  Before he descended, however, he fixed the two
swords upright, one at each end of the platform, as if they were
human sentinels to guard it under the stars.

Then they came down and lunched plentifully in a nest of loose
rocks.  In the same place that night they supped more plentifully
still.  The smoke of Mr. Wilkinson's cigars went up ceaseless and
strong smelling, like a pagan sacrifice; the golden glories of
Mr. Wilkinson's champagne rose to their heads and poured out of
them in fancies and philosophies.  And occasionally they would
look up at the starlight and the rock and see the space guarded
by the two cross-hilted swords, which looked like two black
crosses at either end of a grave.

In this primitive and Homeric truce the week passed by; it
consisted almost entirely of eating, drinking, smoking, talking,
and occasionally singing.  They wrote their records and cast loose
their bottle.  They never ascended to the ominous plateau; they
had never stood there save for that single embarrassed minute
when they had had no time to take stock of the seascape or the
shape of the land.  They did not even explore the island; for
MacIan was partly concerned in prayer and Turnbull entirely
concerned with tobacco; and both these forms of inspiration can
be enjoyed by the secluded and even the sedentary.  It was on a
golden afternoon, the sun sinking over the sea, rayed like the
very head of Apollo, when Turnbull tossed off the last half-pint
from the emptied Wilkinsonian bottle, hurled the bottle into the
sea with objectless energy, and went up to where his sword stood
waiting for him on the hill.  MacIan was already standing heavily
by his with bent head and eyes reading the ground.  He had not
even troubled to throw a glance round the island or the horizon.
But Turnbull being of a more active and birdlike type of mind did
throw a glance round the scene.  The consequence of which was that
he nearly fell off the rock.

On three sides of this shelly and sandy islet the sea stretched
blue and infinite without a speck of land or sail; the same as
Turnbull had first seen it, except that the tide being out it
showed a few yards more of slanting sand under the roots of the
rocks.  But on the fourth side the island exhibited a more
extraordinary feature.  In fact, it exhibited the extraordinary
feature of not being an island at all.  A long, curving neck of
sand, as smooth and wet as the neck of the sea serpent, ran out
into the sea and joined their rock to a line of low, billowing,
and glistening sand-hills, which the sinking sea had just bared
to the sun.  Whether they were firm sand or quicksand it was
difficult to guess; but there was at least no doubt that they lay
on the edge of some larger land; for colourless hills appeared
faintly behind them and no sea could be seen beyond.

"Sakes alive!" cried Turnbull, with rolling eyes; "this ain't an
island in the Atlantic.  We've butted the bally continent of
America."

MacIan turned his head, and his face, already pale, grew a shade
paler.  He was by this time walking in a world of omens and
hieroglyphics, and he could not read anything but what was
baffling or menacing in this brown gigantic arm of the earth
stretched out into the sea to seize him.

"MacIan," said Turnbull, in his temperate way, "whatever our
eternal interrupted tete-a-tetes have taught us or not taught us,
at least we need not fear the charge of fear.  If it is essential
to your emotions, I will cheerfully finish the fight here and
now; but I must confess that if you kill me here I shall die with
my curiosity highly excited and unsatisfied upon a minor point of
geography."

"I do not want to stop now," said the other, in his elephantine
simplicity, "but we must stop for a moment, because it is a
sign--perhaps it is a miracle.  We must see what is at the end of
the road of sand; it may be a bridge built across the gulf by
God."

"So long as you gratify my query," said Turnbull, laughing and
letting back his blade into the sheath, "I do not care for what
reason you choose to stop."

They clambered down the rocky peninsula and trudged along the
sandy isthmus with the plodding resolution of men who seemed
almost to have made up their minds to be wanderers on the face of
the earth.  Despite Turnbull's air of scientific eagerness, he was
really the less impatient of the two; and the Highlander went on
well ahead of him with passionate strides.  By the time they had
walked for about half an hour in the ups and downs of those
dreary sands, the distance between the two had lengthened and
MacIan was only a tall figure silhouetted for an instant upon the
crest of some sand-dune and then disappearing behind it.  This
rather increased the Robinson Crusoe feeling in Mr. Turnbull, and
he looked about almost disconsolately for some sign of life.  What
sort of life he expected it to be if it appeared, he did not very
clearly know.  He has since confessed that he thinks that in his
subconsciousness he expected an alligator.

The first sign of life that he did see, however, was something
more extraordinary than the largest alligator.  It was nothing
less than the notorious Mr. Evan MacIan coming bounding back
across the sand-heaps breathless, without his cap and keeping the
sword in his hand only by a habit now quite hardened.

"Take care, Turnbull," he cried out from a good distance as he
ran, "I've seen a native."

"A native?" repeated his companion, whose scenery had of late
been chiefly of shellfish, "what the deuce!  Do you mean an
oyster?"

"No," said MacIan, stopping and breathing hard, "I mean a savage.
A black man."

"Why, where did you see him?" asked the staring editor.

"Over there--behind that hill," said the gasping MacIan.  "He put
up his black head and grinned at me."

Turnbull thrust his hands through his red hair like one who gives
up the world as a bad riddle.  "Lord love a duck," said he, "can
it be Jamaica?"

Then glancing at his companion with a small frown, as of one
slightly suspicious, he said: "I say, don't think me rude--but
you're a visionary kind of fellow--and then we drank a great
deal.  Do you mind waiting here while I go and see for myself?"

"Shout if you get into trouble," said the Celt, with composure;
"you will find it as I say."

Turnbull ran off ahead with a rapidity now far greater than his
rival's, and soon vanished over the disputed sand-hill.  Then five
minutes passed, and then seven minutes; and MacIan bit his lip
and swung his sword, and the other did not reappear.  Finally,
with a Gaelic oath, Evan started forward to the rescue, and
almost at the same moment the small figure of the missing man
appeared on the ridge against the sky.

Even at that distance, however, there was something odd about his
attitude; so odd that MacIan continued to make his way in that
direction.  It looked as if he were wounded; or, still more, as if
he were ill.  He wavered as he came down the slope and seemed
flinging himself into peculiar postures.  But it was only when he
came within three feet of MacIan's face, that that observer of
mankind fully realized that Mr. James Turnbull was roaring with
laughter.

"You are quit right," sobbed that wholly demoralized journalist.
"He's black, oh, there's no doubt the black's all right--as far
as it goes."  And he went off again into convulsions of his
humorous ailment.

"What ever is the matter with you?" asked MacIan, with stern
impatience.  "Did you see the nigger----"

"I saw the nigger," gasped Turnbull.  "I saw the splendid
barbarian Chief.  I saw the Emperor of Ethiopia--oh, I saw him all
right.  The nigger's hands and face are a lovely colour--and the
nigger----" And he was overtaken once more.

"Well, well, well," said Evan, stamping each monosyllable on the
sand, "what about the nigger?"

"Well, the truth is," said Turnbull, suddenly and startlingly,
becoming quite grave and precise, "the truth is, the nigger is a
Margate nigger, and we are now on the edge of the Isle of Thanet,
a few miles from Margate."

Then he had a momentary return of his hysteria and said: "I say,
old boy, I should like to see a chart of our fortnight's cruise
in Wilkinson's yacht."

MacIan had no smile in answer, but his eager lips opened as if
parched for the truth.  "You mean to say," he began----

"Yes, I mean to say," said Turnbull, "and I mean to say something
funnier still.  I have learnt everything I wanted to know from the
partially black musician over there, who has taken a run in his
war-paint to meet a friend in a quiet pub along the coast--the
noble savage has told me all about it.  The bottle containing our
declaration, doctrines, and dying sentiments was washed up on
Margate beach yesterday in the presence of one alderman, two
bathing-machine men, three policemen, seven doctors, and a
hundred and thirteen London clerks on a holiday, to all of whom,
whether directly or indirectly, our composition gave enormous
literary pleasure.  Buck up, old man, this story of ours is a
switchback.  I have begun to understand the pulse and the time of
it; now we are up in a cathedral and then we are down in a
theatre, where they only play farces.  Come, I am quite
reconciled--let us enjoy the farce."

But MacIan said nothing, and an instant afterwards Turnbull
himself called out in an entirely changed voice: "Oh, this is
damnable!  This is not to be borne!"

MacIan followed his eye along the sand-hills.  He saw what looked
like the momentary and waving figure of the nigger minstrel, and
then he saw a heavy running policeman take the turn of the
sand-hill with the smooth solemnity of a railway train.



XIII. THE GARDEN OF PEACE

Up to this instant Evan MacIan had really understood nothing; but
when he saw the policeman he saw everything.  He saw his enemies,
all the powers and princes of the earth.  He suddenly altered from
a staring statue to a leaping man of the mountains.

"We must break away from him here," he cried, briefly, and went
like a whirlwind over the sand ridge in a straight line and at a
particular angle.  When the policeman had finished his admirable
railway curve, he found a wall of failing sand between him and
the pursued.  By the time he had scaled it thrice, slid down
twice, and crested it in the third effort, the two flying figures
were far in front.  They found the sand harder farther on; it
began to be crusted with scraps of turf and in a few moments they
were flying easily over an open common of rank sea-grass.  They
had no easy business, however; for the bottle which they had so
innocently sent into the chief gate of Thanet had called to life
the police of half a county on their trail.  From every side
across the grey-green common figures could be seen running and
closing in; and it was only when MacIan with his big body broke
down the tangled barrier of a little wood, as men break down a
door with the shoulder; it was only when they vanished crashing
into the underworld of the black wood, that their hunters were
even instantaneously thrown off the scent.

At the risk of struggling a little longer like flies in that
black web of twigs and trunks, Evan (who had an instinct of the
hunter or the hunted) took an incalculable course through the
forest, which let them out at last by a forest opening--quite
forgotten by the leaders of the chase.  They ran a mile or two
farther along the edge of the wood until they reached another and
somewhat similar opening.  Then MacIan stood utterly still and
listened, as animals listen, for every sound in the universe.
Then he said: "We are quit of them."  And Turnbull said: "Where
shall we go now?"

MacIan looked at the silver sunset that was closing in, barred by
plumy lines of purple cloud; he looked at the high tree-tops that
caught the last light and at the birds going heavily homeward,
just as if all these things were bits of written advice that he
could read.

Then he said: "The best place we can go to is to bed.  If we can
get some sleep in this wood, now everyone has cleared out of it,
it will be worth a handicap of two hundred yards tomorrow."

Turnbull, who was exceptionally lively and laughing in his
demeanour, kicked his legs about like a schoolboy and said he did
not want to go to sleep.  He walked incessantly and talked very
brilliantly.  And when at last he lay down on the hard earth,
sleep struck him senseless like a hammer.

Indeed, he needed the strongest sleep he could get; for the earth
was still full of darkness and a kind of morning fog when his
fellow-fugitive shook him awake.

"No more sleep, I'm afraid," said Evan, in a heavy, almost
submissive, voice of apology.  "They've gone on past us right
enough for a good thirty miles; but now they've found out their
mistake, and they're coming back."

"Are you sure?" said Turnbull, sitting up and rubbing his red
eyebrows with his hand.

The next moment, however, he had jumped up alive and leaping like
a man struck with a shock of cold water, and he was plunging
after MacIan along the woodland path.  The shape of their old
friend the constable had appeared against the pearl and pink of
the sunrise.  Somehow, it always looked a very funny shape when
seen against the sunrise.

           *                    *                   *

A wash of weary daylight was breaking over the country-side, and
the fields and roads were full of white mist--the kind of white
mist that clings in corners like cotton wool.  The empty road,
along which the chase had taken its turn, was overshadowed on one
side by a very high discoloured wall, stained, and streaked
green, as with seaweed--evidently the high-shouldered sentinel of
some great gentleman's estate.  A yard or two from the wall ran
parallel to it a linked and tangled line of lime-trees, forming a
kind of cloister along the side of the road.  It was under this
branching colonnade that the two fugitives fled, almost concealed
from their pursuers by the twilight, the mist and the leaping
zoetrope of shadows.  Their feet, though beating the ground
furiously, made but a faint noise; for they had kicked away their
boots in the wood; their long, antiquated weapons made no jingle
or clatter, for they had strapped them across their backs like
guitars.  They had all the advantages that invisibility and
silence can add to speed.

A hundred and fifty yards behind them down the centre of the
empty road the first of their pursuers came pounding and
panting--a fat but powerful policeman who had distanced all the
rest.  He came on at a splendid pace for so portly a figure; but,
like all heavy bodies in motion, he gave the impression that it
would be easier for him to increase his pace than to slacken it
suddenly.  Nothing short of a brick wall could have abruptly
brought him up.  Turnbull turned his head slightly and found
breath to say something to MacIan.  MacIan nodded.

Pursuer and pursued were fixed in their distance as they fled,
for some quarter of a mile, when they came to a place where two
or three of the trees grew twistedly together, making a special
obscurity.  Past this place the pursuing policeman went thundering
without thought or hesitation.  But he was pursuing his shadow or
the wind; for Turnbull had put one foot in a crack of the tree
and gone up it as quickly and softly as a cat.  Somewhat more
laboriously but in equal silence the long legs of the Highlander
had followed; and crouching in crucial silence in the cloud of
leaves, they saw the whole posse of their pursuers go by and die
into the dust and mists of the distance.

The white vapour lay, as it often does, in lean and palpable
layers; and even the head of the tree was above it in the
half-daylight, like a green ship swinging on a sea of foam.  But
higher yet behind them, and readier to catch the first coming of
the sun, ran the rampart of the top of the wall, which in their
excitement of escape looked at once indispensable and
unattainable, like the wall of heaven.  Here, however, it was
MacIan's turn to have the advantage; for, though less
light-limbed and feline, he was longer and stronger in the arms.
In two seconds he had tugged up his chin over the wall like a
horizontal bar; the next he sat astride of it, like a horse of
stone.  With his assistance Turnbull vaulted to the same perch,
and the two began cautiously to shift along the wall in the
direction by which they had come, doubling on their tracks to
throw off the last pursuit.  MacIan could not rid himself of the
fancy of bestriding a steed; the long, grey coping of the wall
shot out in front of him, like the long, grey neck of some
nightmare Rosinante.  He had the quaint thought that he and
Turnbull were two knights on one steed on the old shield of the
Templars.

The nightmare of the stone horse was increased by the white fog,
which seemed thicker inside the wall than outside.  They could
make nothing of the enclosure upon which they were partial
trespassers, except that the green and crooked branches of a big
apple-tree came crawling at them out of the mist, like the
tentacles of some green cuttlefish.  Anything would serve,
however, that was likely to confuse their trail, so they both
decided without need of words to use this tree also as a
ladder--a ladder of descent.  When they dropped from the lowest
branch to the ground their stockinged feet felt hard gravel
beneath them.

They had alighted in the middle of a very broad garden path, and
the clearing mist permitted them to see the edge of a
well-clipped lawn.  Though the white vapour was still a veil, it
was like the gauzy veil of a transformation scene in a pantomime;
for through it there glowed shapeless masses of colour, masses
which might be clouds of sunrise or mosaics of gold and crimson,
or ladies robed in ruby and emerald draperies.  As it thinned yet
farther they saw that it was only flowers; but flowers in such
insolent mass and magnificence as can seldom be seen out of the
tropics.  Purple and crimson rhododendrons rose arrogantly, like
rampant heraldic animals against their burning background of
laburnum gold.  The roses were red hot; the clematis was, so to
speak, blue hot.  And yet the mere whiteness of the syringa seemed
the most violent colour of all.  As the golden sunlight gradually
conquered the mists, it had really something of the sensational
sweetness of the slow opening of the gates of Eden.  MacIan, whose
mind was always haunted with such seraphic or titanic parallels,
made some such remark to his companion.  But Turnbull only cursed
and said that it was the back garden of some damnable rich man.

When the last haze had faded from the ordered paths, the open
lawns, and the flaming flower-beds, the two realized, not without
an abrupt re-examination of their position, that they were not
alone in the garden.

Down the centre of the central garden path, preceded by a blue
cloud from a cigarette, was walking a gentleman who evidently
understood all the relish of a garden in the very early morning.
He was a slim yet satisfied figure, clad in a suit of pale-grey
tweed, so subdued that the pattern was imperceptible--a costume
that was casual but not by any means careless.  His face, which
was reflective and somewhat over-refined, was the face of a quite
elderly man, though his stringy hair and moustache were still
quite yellow.  A double eye-glass, with a broad, black ribbon,
drooped from his aquiline nose, and he smiled, as he communed
with himself, with a self-content which was rare and almost
irritating.  The straw panama on his head was many shades shabbier
than his clothes, as if he had caught it up by accident.

It needed the full shock of the huge shadow of MacIan, falling
across his sunlit path, to rouse him from his smiling reverie.
When this had fallen on him he lifted his head a little and
blinked at the intruders with short-sighted benevolence, but with
far less surprise than might have been expected.  He was a
gentleman; that is, he had social presence of mind, whether for
kindness or for insolence.

"Can I do anything for you?" he said, at last.

MacIan bowed.  "You can extend to us your pardon," he said, for he
also came of a whole race of gentlemen--of gentlemen without
shirts to their backs.  "I am afraid we are trespassing.  We have
just come over the wall."

"Over the wall?" repeated the smiling old gentleman, still
without letting his surprise come uppermost.

"I suppose I am not wrong, sir," continued MacIan, "in supposing
that these grounds inside the wall belong to you?"

The man in the panama looked at the ground and smoked
thoughtfully for a few moments, after which he said, with a sort
of matured conviction:

"Yes, certainly; the grounds inside the wall really belong to me,
and the grounds outside the wall, too."

"A large proprietor, I imagine," said Turnbull, with a truculent
eye.

"Yes," answered the old gentleman, looking at him with a steady
smile.  "A large proprietor."

Turnbull's eye grew even more offensive, and he began biting his
red beard; but MacIan seemed to recognize a type with which he
could deal and continued quite easily:

"I am sure that a man like you will not need to be told that one
sees and does a good many things that do not get into the
newspapers.  Things which, on the whole, had better not get into
the newspapers."

The smile of the large proprietor broadened for a moment under
his loose, light moustache, and the other continued with
increased confidence:

"One sometimes wants to have it out with another man.  The police
won't allow it in the streets--and then there's the County
Council--and in the fields even nothing's allowed but posters of
pills.  But in a gentleman's garden, now----"

The strange gentleman smiled again and said, easily enough: "Do
you want to fight?  What do you want to fight about?"

MacIan had understood his man pretty well up to that point; an
instinct common to all men with the aristocratic tradition of
Europe had guided him.  He knew that the kind of man who in his
own back garden wears good clothes and spoils them with a bad hat
is not the kind of man who has an abstract horror of illegal
actions of violence or the evasion of the police.  But a man may
understand ragging and yet be very far from understanding
religious ragging.  This seeming host of theirs might comprehend a
quarrel of husband and lover or a difficulty at cards or even
escape from a pursuing tailor; but it still remained doubtful
whether he would feel the earth fail under him in that earthquake
instant when the Virgin is compared to a goddess of Mesopotamia.
Even MacIan, therefore (whose tact was far from being his strong
point), felt the necessity for some compromise in the mode of
approach.  At last he said, and even then with hesitation:

"We are fighting about God; there can be nothing so important as
that."

The tilted eye-glasses of the old gentleman fell abruptly from
his nose, and he thrust his aristocratic chin so far forward that
his lean neck seemed to shoot out longer like a telescope.

"About God?" he queried, in a key completely new.

"Look here!" cried Turnbull, taking his turn roughly, "I'll tell
you what it's all about.  I think that there's no God.  I take it
that it's nobody's business but mine--or God's, if there is one.
This young gentleman from the Highlands happens to think that
it's his business.  In consequence, he first takes a walking-stick
and smashes my shop; then he takes the same walking-stick and
tries to smash me.  To this I naturally object.  I suggest that if
it comes to that we should both have sticks.  He improves on the
suggestion and proposes that we should both have steel-pointed
sticks.  The police (with characteristic unreasonableness) will
not accept either of our proposals; the result is that we run
about dodging the police and have jumped over our garden wall
into your magnificent garden to throw ourselves on your
magnificent hospitality."

The face of the old gentleman had grown redder and redder during
this address, but it was still smiling; and when he broke out it
was with a kind of guffaw.

"So you really want to fight with drawn swords in my garden," he
asked, "about whether there is really a God?"

"Why not?" said MacIan, with his simple monstrosity of speech;
"all man's worship began when the Garden of Eden was founded."

"Yes, by----!" said Turnbull, with an oath, "and ended when the
Zoological Gardens were founded."

"In this garden!  In my presence!" cried the stranger, stamping up
and down the gravel and choking with laughter," whether there is
a God!"  And he went stamping up and down the garden, making it
echo with his unintelligible laughter.  Then he came back to them
more composed and wiping his eyes.

"Why, how small the world is!" he cried at last.  "I can settle
the whole matter.  Why, I am God!"

And he suddenly began to kick and wave his well-clad legs about
the lawn.

"You are what?" repeated Turnbull, in a tone which is beyond
description.

"Why, God, of course!" answered the other, thoroughly amused.
"How funny it is to think that you have tumbled over a garden
wall and fallen exactly on the right person!  You might have gone
floundering about in all sorts of churches and chapels and
colleges and schools of philosophy looking for some evidence of
the existence of God.  Why, there is no evidence, except seeing
him.  And now you've seen him.  You've seen him dance!"

And the obliging old gentleman instantly stood on one leg without
relaxing at all the grave and cultured benignity of his
expression.

"I understood that this garden----" began the bewildered MacIan.

"Quite so!  Quite so!" said the man on one leg, nodding gravely.
"I said this garden belonged to me and the land outside it.  So
they do.  So does the country beyond that and the sea beyond that
and all the rest of the earth.  So does the moon.  So do the sun
and stars."  And he added, with a smile of apology: "You see, I'm
God."

Turnbull and MacIan looked at him for one moment with a sort of
notion that perhaps he was not too old to be merely playing the
fool.  But after staring steadily for an instant Turnbull saw the
hard and horrible earnestness in the man's eyes behind all his
empty animation.  Then Turnbull looked very gravely at the strict
gravel walls and the gay flower-beds and the long rectangular
red-brick building, which the mist had left evident beyond them.
Then he looked at MacIan.

Almost at the same moment another man came walking quickly round
the regal clump of rhododendrons.  He had the look of a prosperous
banker, wore a good tall silk hat, was almost stout enough to
burst the buttons of a fine frock-coat; but he was talking to
himself, and one of his elbows had a singular outward jerk as he
went by.



