XIV. A MUSEUM OF SOULS

The man with the good hat and the jumping elbow went by very
quickly; yet the man with the bad hat, who thought he was God,
overtook him.  He ran after him and jumped over a bed of geraniums
to catch him.

"I beg your Majesty's pardon," he said, with mock humility, "but
here is a quarrel which you ought really to judge."

Then as he led the heavy, silk-hatted man back towards the group,
he caught MacIan's ear in order to whisper: "This poor gentleman
is mad; he thinks he is Edward VII."  At this the self-appointed
Creator slightly winked.  "Of course you won't trust him much;
come to me for everything.  But in my position one has to meet so
many people.  One has to be broadminded."

The big banker in the black frock-coat and hat was standing quite
grave and dignified on the lawn, save for his slight twitch of
one limb, and he did not seem by any means unworthy of the part
which the other promptly forced upon him.

"My dear fellow," said the man in the straw hat, "these two
gentlemen are going to fight a duel of the utmost importance.
Your own royal position and my much humbler one surely indicate
us as the proper seconds.  Seconds--yes, seconds----" and here
the speaker was once more shaken with his old malady of
laughter.

"Yes, you and I are both seconds--and these two gentlemen can
obviously fight in front of us.  You, he-he, are the king.  I am
God; really, they could hardly have better supporters.  They have
come to the right place."

Then Turnbull, who had been staring with a frown at the fresh
turf, burst out with a rather bitter laugh and cried, throwing
his red head in the air:

"Yes, by God, MacIan, I think we have come to the right place!"
And MacIan answered, with an adamantine stupidity:

"Any place is the right place where they will let us do it."

There was a long stillness, and their eyes involuntarily took in
the landscape, as they had taken in all the landscapes of their
everlasting combat; the bright, square garden behind the shop;
the whole lift and leaning of the side of Hampstead Heath; the
little garden of the decadent choked with flowers; the square of
sand beside the sea at sunrise.  They both felt at the same moment
all the breadth and blossoming beauty of that paradise, the
coloured trees, the natural and restful nooks and also the great
wall of stone--more awful than the wall of China--from which no
flesh could flee.

Turnbull was moodily balancing his sword in his hand as the other
spoke; then he started, for a mouth whispered quite close to his
ear.  With a softness incredible in any cat, the huge, heavy man
in the black hat and frock-coat had crept across the lawn from
his own side and was saying in his ear: "Don't trust that second
of yours.  He's mad and not so mad, either; for he frightfully
cunning and sharp.  Don't believe the story he tells you about why
I hate him.  I know the story he'll tell; I overheard it when the
housekeeper was talking to the postman.  It's too long to talk
about now, and I expect we're watched, but----"

Something in Turnbull made him want suddenly to be sick on the
grass; the mere healthy and heathen horror of the unclean; the
mere inhumane hatred of the inhuman state of madness.  He seemed
to hear all round him the hateful whispers of that place,
innumerable as leaves whispering in the wind, and each of them
telling eagerly some evil that had not happened or some terrific
secret which was not true.  All the rationalist and plain man
revolted within him against bowing down for a moment in that
forest of deception and egotistical darkness.  He wanted to blow
up that palace of delusions with dynamite; and in some wild way,
which I will not defend, he tried to do it.

He looked across at MacIan and said: "Oh, I can't stand this!"

"Can't stand what?" asked his opponent, eyeing him doubtfully.

"Shall we say the atmosphere?" replied Turnbull; "one can't use
uncivil expressions even to a--deity.  The fact is, I don't like
having God for my second."

"Sir!" said that being in a state of great offence, "in my
position I am not used to having my favours refused.  Do you know
who I am?"

The editor of _The Atheist_ turned upon him like one who has lost
all patience, and exploded: "Yes, you are God, aren't you?" he
said, abruptly, "why do we have two sets of teeth?"

"Teeth?" spluttered the genteel lunatic; "teeth?"

"Yes," cried Turnbull, advancing on him swiftly and with animated
gestures, "why does teething hurt?  Why do growing pains hurt?  Why
are measles catching?  Why does a rose have thorns?  Why do
rhinoceroses have horns?  Why is the horn on the top of the nose?
Why haven't I a horn on the top of my nose, eh?"  And he struck
the bridge of his nose smartly with his forefinger to indicate
the place of the omission and then wagged the finger menacingly
at the Creator.

"I've often wanted to meet you," he resumed, sternly, after a
pause, "to hold you accountable for all the idiocy and cruelty of
this muddled and meaningless world of yours.  You make a hundred
seeds and only one bears fruit.  You make a million worlds and
only one seems inhabited.  What do you mean by it, eh?  What do you
mean by it?"

The unhappy lunatic had fallen back before this quite novel form
of attack, and lifted his burnt-out cigarette almost like one
warding off a blow.  Turnbull went on like a torrent.

"A man died yesterday in Ealing.  You murdered him.  A girl had the
toothache in Croydon.  You gave it her.  Fifty sailors were drowned
off Selsey Bill.  You scuttled their ship.  What have you got to
say for yourself, eh?"

The representative of omnipotence looked as if he had left most
of these things to his subordinates; he passed a hand over his
wrinkling brow and said in a voice much saner than any he had yet
used:

"Well, if you dislike my assistance, of course--perhaps the other
gentleman----"

"The other gentleman," cried Turnbull, scornfully, "is a
submissive and loyal and obedient gentleman.  He likes the people
who wear crowns, whether of diamonds or of stars.  He believes in
the divine right of kings, and it is appropriate enough that he
should have the king for his second.  But it is not appropriate to
me that I should have God for my second.  God is not good enough.
I dislike and I deny the divine right of kings.  But I dislike
more and I deny more the divine right of divinity."

Then after a pause in which he swallowed his passion, he said to
MacIan: "You have got the right second, anyhow."

The Highlander did not answer, but stood as if thunderstruck with
one long and heavy thought.  Then at last he turned abruptly to
his second in the silk hat and said: "Who are you?"

The man in the silk hat blinked and bridled in affected surprise,
like one who was in truth accustomed to be doubted.

"I am King Edward VII," he said, with shaky arrogance.  "Do you
doubt my word?"

"I do not doubt it in the least," answered MacIan.

"Then, why," said the large man in the silk hat, trembling from
head to foot, "why do you wear your hat before the king?"

"Why should I take it off," retorted MacIan, with equal heat,
"before a usurper?"

Turnbull swung round on his heel.  "Well, really," he said, "I
thought at least you were a loyal subject."

"I am the only loyal subject," answered the Gael.  "For nearly
thirty years I have walked these islands and have not found
another."

"You are always hard to follow," remarked Turnbull, genially,
"and sometimes so much so as to be hardly worth following."

"I alone am loyal," insisted MacIan; "for I alone am in
rebellion.  I am ready at any instant to restore the Stuarts.  I
am ready at any instant to defy the Hanoverian brood--and I defy
it now even when face to face with the actual ruler of the
enormous British Empire!"

And folding his arms and throwing back his lean, hawklike face,
he haughtily confronted the man with the formal frock-coat and
the eccentric elbow.

"What right had you stunted German squires," he cried, "to
interfere in a quarrel between Scotch and English and Irish
gentlemen?  Who made you, whose fathers could not splutter English
while they walked in Whitehall, who made you the judge between
the republic of Sidney and the monarchy of Montrose?  What had
your sires to do with England that they should have the foul
offering of the blood of Derwentwater and the heart of Jimmy
Dawson?  Where are the corpses of Culloden?  Where is the blood of
Lochiel?"  MacIan advanced upon his opponent with a bony and
pointed finger, as if indicating the exact pocket in which the
blood of that Cameron was probably kept; and Edward VII fell back
a few paces in considerable confusion.

"What good have you ever done to us?" he continued in harsher and
harsher accents, forcing the other back towards the flower-beds.
"What good have you ever done, you race of German sausages?  Yards
of barbarian etiquette, to throttle the freedom of aristocracy!
Gas of northern metaphysics to blow up Broad Church bishops like
balloons.  Bad pictures and bad manners and pantheism and the
Albert Memorial.  Go back to Hanover, you humbug?  Go to----"

Before the end of this tirade the arrogance of the monarch had
entirely given way; he had fairly turned tail and was trundling
away down the path.  MacIan strode after him still preaching and
flourishing his large, lean hands.  The other two remained in the
centre of the lawn--Turnbull in convulsions of laughter, the
lunatic in convulsions of disgust.  Almost at the same moment a
third figure came stepping swiftly across the lawn.

The advancing figure walked with a stoop, and yet somehow flung
his forked and narrow beard forward.  That carefully cut and
pointed yellow beard was, indeed, the most emphatic thing about
him.  When he clasped his hands behind him, under the tails of his
coat, he would wag his beard at a man like a big forefinger.  It
performed almost all his gestures; it was more important than the
glittering eye-glasses through which he looked or the beautiful
bleating voice in which he spoke.  His face and neck were of a
lusty red, but lean and stringy; he always wore his expensive
gold-rim eye-glasses slightly askew upon his aquiline nose; and
he always showed two gleaming foreteeth under his moustache, in a
smile so perpetual as to earn the reputation of a sneer.  But for
the crooked glasses his dress was always exquisite; and but for
the smile he was perfectly and perennially depressed.

"Don't you think," said the new-comer, with a sort of
supercilious entreaty, "that we had better all come into
breakfast?  It is such a mistake to wait for breakfast.  It spoils
one's temper so much."

"Quite so," replied Turnbull, seriously.

"There seems almost to have been a little quarrelling here," said
the man with the goatish beard.

"It is rather a long story," said Turnbull, smiling.  "Originally,
it might be called a phase in the quarrel between science and
religion."

The new-comer started slightly, and Turnbull replied to the
question on his face.

"Oh, yes," he said, "I am science!"

"I congratulate you heartily," answered the other, "I am Doctor
Quayle."

Turnbull's eyes did not move, but he realized that the man in the
panama hat had lost all his ease of a landed proprietor and had
withdrawn to a distance of thirty yards, where he stood glaring
with all the contraction of fear and hatred that can stiffen a
cat.

           *                    *                   *

MacIan was sitting somewhat disconsolately on a stump of tree,
his large black head half buried in his large brown hands, when
Turnbull strode up to him chewing a cigarette.  He did not look
up, but his comrade and enemy addressed him like one who must
free himself of his feelings.

"Well, I hope, at any rate," he said, "that you like your
precious religion now.  I hope you like the society of this poor
devil whom your damned tracts and hymns and priests have driven
out of his wits.  Five men in this place, they tell me, five men
in this place who might have been fathers of families, and every
one of them thinks he is God the Father.  Oh! you may talk about
the ugliness of science, but there is no one here who thinks he
is Protoplasm."

"They naturally prefer a bright part," said MacIan, wearily.
"Protoplasm is not worth going mad about."

"At least," said Turnbull, savagely, "it was your Jesus Christ
who started all this bosh about being God."

For one instant MacIan opened the eyes of battle; then his
tightened lips took a crooked smile and he said, quite calmly:

"No, the idea is older; it was Satan who first said that he was
God."

"Then, what," asked Turnbull, very slowly, as he softly picked a
flower, "what is the difference between Christ and Satan?"

"It is quite simple," replied the Highlander.  "Christ descended
into hell; Satan fell into it."

"Does it make much odds?" asked the free-thinker.

"It makes all the odds," said the other.  "One of them wanted to
go up and went down; the other wanted to go down and went up.  A
god can be humble, a devil can only be humbled."

"Why are you always wanting to humble a man?" asked Turnbull,
knitting his brows.  "It affects me as ungenerous."

"Why were you wanting to humble a god when you found him in this
garden?" asked MacIan.

"That was an extreme case of impudence," said Turnbull.

"Granting the man his almighty pretensions, I think he was very
modest," said MacIan.  "It is we who are arrogant, who know we are
only men.  The ordinary man in the street is more of a monster
than that poor fellow; for the man in the street treats himself
as God Almighty when he knows he isn't.  He expects the universe
to turn round him, though he knows he isn't the centre."

"Well," said Turnbull, sitting down on the grass, "this is a
digression, anyhow.  What I want to point out is, that your faith
does end in asylums and my science doesn't."

"Doesn't it, by George!" cried MacIan, scornfully.  "There are a
few men here who are mad on God and a few who are mad on the
Bible.  But I bet there are many more who are simply mad on
madness."

"Do you really believe it?" asked the other.

"Scores of them, I should say," answered MacIan.  "Fellows who
have read medical books or fellows whose fathers and uncles had
something hereditary in their heads--the whole air they breathe
is mad."

"All the same," said Turnbull, shrewdly, "I bet you haven't found
a madman of that sort."

"I bet I have!" cried Evan, with unusual animation.  "I've been
walking about the garden talking to a poor chap all the morning.
He's simply been broken down and driven raving by your damned
science.  Talk about believing one is God--why, it's quite an old,
comfortable, fireside fancy compared with the sort of things this
fellow believes.  He believes that there is a God, but that he is
better than God.  He says God will be afraid to face him.  He says
one is always progressing beyond the best.  He put his arm in mine
and whispered in my ear, as if it were the apocalypse: 'Never
trust a God that you can't improve on.'"

"What can he have meant?" said the atheist, with all his logic
awake.  "Obviously one should not trust any God that one can
improve on."

"It is the way he talks," said MacIan, almost indifferently; "but
he says rummier things than that.  He says that a man's doctor
ought to decide what woman he marries; and he says that children
ought not to be brought up by their parents, because a physical
partiality will then distort the judgement of the educator."

"Oh, dear!" said Turnbull, laughing, "you have certainly come
across a pretty bad case, and incidentally proved your own.  I
suppose some men do lose their wits through science as through
love and other good things."

"And he says," went on MacIan, monotonously, "that he cannot see
why anyone should suppose that a triangle is a three-sided
figure.  He says that on some higher plane----"

Turnbull leapt to his feet as by an electric shock.  "I never
could have believed," he cried, "that you had humour enough to
tell a lie.  You've gone a bit too far, old man, with your little
joke.  Even in a lunatic asylum there can't be anybody who, having
thought about the matter, thinks that a triangle has not got
three sides.  If he exists he must be a new era in human
psychology.  But he doesn't exist."

"I will go and fetch him," said MacIan, calmly; "I left the poor
fellow wandering about by the nasturtium bed."

MacIan vanished, and in a few moments returned, trailing with him
his own discovery among lunatics, who was a slender man with a
fixed smile and an unfixed and rolling head.  He had a goatlike
beard just long enough to be shaken in a strong wind.  Turnbull
sprang to his feet and was like one who is speechless through
choking a sudden shout of laughter.

"Why, you great donkey," he shouted, in an ear-shattering
whisper, "that's not one of the patients at all.  That's one of
the doctors."

Evan looked back at the leering head with the long-pointed beard
and repeated the word inquiringly: "One of the doctors?"

"Oh, you know what I mean," said Turnbull, impatiently.  "The
medical authorities of the place."

Evan was still staring back curiously at the beaming and bearded
creature behind him.

"The mad doctors," said Turnbull, shortly.

"Quite so," said MacIan.

After a rather restless silence Turnbull plucked MacIan by the
elbow and pulled him aside.

"For goodness sake," he said, "don't offend this fellow; he may
be as mad as ten hatters, if you like, but he has us between his
finger and thumb.  This is the very time he appointed to talk with
us about our--well, our exeat."

"But what can it matter?" asked the wondering MacIan.  "He can't
keep us in the asylum.  We're not mad."

"Jackass!" said Turnbull, heartily, "of course we're not mad.  Of
course, if we are medically examined and the thing is thrashed
out, they will find we are not mad.  But don't you see that if the
thing is thrashed out it will mean letters to this reference and
telegrams to that; and at the first word of who we are, we shall
be taken out of a madhouse, where we may smoke, to a jail, where
we mayn't.  No, if we manage this very quietly, he may merely let
us out at the front door as stray revellers.  If there's half an
hour of inquiry, we are cooked."

MacIan looked at the grass frowningly for a few seconds, and then
said in a new, small and childish voice: "I am awfully stupid,
Mr. Turnbull; you must be patient with me."

Turnbull caught Evan's elbow again with quite another gesture.
"Come," he cried, with the harsh voice of one who hides emotion,
"come and let us be tactful in chorus."

The doctor with the pointed beard was already slanting it forward
at a more than usually acute angle, with the smile that expressed
expectancy.

"I hope I do not hurry you, gentlemen," he said, with the
faintest suggestion of a sneer at their hurried consultation,
"but I believe you wanted to see me at half past eleven."

"I am most awfully sorry, Doctor," said Turnbull, with ready
amiability; "I never meant to keep you waiting; but the silly
accident that has landed us in your garden may have some rather
serious consequences to our friends elsewhere, and my friend here
was just drawing my attention to some of them."

"Quite so!  Quite so!" said the doctor, hurriedly.  "If you really
want to put anything before me, I can give you a few moments in
my consulting-room."

He led them rapidly into a small but imposing apartment, which
seemed to be built and furnished entirely in red-varnished wood.
There was one desk occupied with carefully docketed papers; and
there were several chairs of the red-varnished wood--though of
different shape.  All along the wall ran something that might have
been a bookcase, only that it was not filled with books, but with
flat, oblong slabs or cases of the same polished dark-red
consistency.  What those flat wooden cases were they could form no
conception.

The doctor sat down with a polite impatience on his professional
perch; MacIan remained standing, but Turnbull threw himself
almost with luxury into a hard wooden arm-chair.

"This is a most absurd business, Doctor," he said, "and I am
ashamed to take up the time of busy professional men with such
pranks from outside.  The plain fact is, that he and I and a pack
of silly men and girls have organized a game across this part of
the country--a sort of combination of hare and hounds and hide
and seek--I dare say you've heard of it.  We are the hares, and,
seeing your high wall look so inviting, we tumbled over it, and
naturally were a little startled with what we found on the other
side."

"Quite so!" said the doctor, mildly.  "I can understand that you
were startled."

Turnbull had expected him to ask what place was the headquarters
of the new exhilarating game, and who were the male and female
enthusiasts who had brought it to such perfection; in fact,
Turnbull was busy making up these personal and topographical
particulars.  As the doctor did not ask the question, he grew
slightly uneasy, and risked the question: "I hope you will accept
my assurance that the thing was an accident and that no intrusion
was meant."

"Oh, yes, sir," replied the doctor, smiling, "I accept everything
that you say."

"In that case," said Turnbull, rising genially, "we must not
further interrupt your important duties.  I suppose there will be
someone to let us out?"

"No," said the doctor, still smiling steadily and pleasantly,
"there will be no one to let you out."

"Can we let ourselves out, then?" asked Turnbull, in some
surprise.

"Why, of course not," said the beaming scientist; "think how
dangerous that would be in a place like this."

"Then, how the devil are we to get out?" cried Turnbull, losing
his manners for the first time.

"It is a question of time, of receptivity, and treatment," said
the doctor, arching his eyebrows indifferently.  "I do not regard
either of your cases as incurable."

And with that the man of the world was struck dumb, and, as in
all intolerable moments, the word was with the unworldly.

MacIan took one stride to the table, leant across it, and said:
"We can't stop here, we're not mad people!"

"We don't use the crude phrase," said the doctor, smiling at his
patent-leather boots.

"But you _can't_ think us mad," thundered MacIan.  "You never saw
us before.  You know nothing about us.  You haven't even examined
us."

The doctor threw back his head and beard.  "Oh, yes," he said,
"very thoroughly."

"But you can't shut a man up on your mere impressions without
documents or certificates or anything?"

The doctor got languidly to his feet.  "Quite so," he said.  "You
certainly ought to see the documents."

He went across to the curious mock book-shelves and took down one
of the flat mahogany cases.  This he opened with a curious key at
his watch-chain, and laying back a flap revealed a quire of
foolscap covered with close but quite clear writing.  The first
three words were in such large copy-book hand that they caught
the eye even at a distance.  They were: "MacIan, Evan Stuart."

Evan bent his angry eagle face over it; yet something blurred it
and he could never swear he saw it distinctly.  He saw something
that began: "Prenatal influences predisposing to mania.
Grandfather believed in return of the Stuarts.  Mother carried
bone of St. Eulalia with which she touched children in sickness.
Marked religious mania at early age----"

Evan fell back and fought for his speech.  "Oh!" he burst out at
last.  "Oh! if all this world I have walked in had been as sane as
my mother was."

Then he compressed his temples with his hands, as if to crush
them.  And then lifted suddenly a face that looked fresh and
young, as if he had dipped and washed it in some holy well.

"Very well," he cried; "I will take the sour with the sweet.  I
will pay the penalty of having enjoyed God in this monstrous
modern earth that cannot enjoy man or beast.  I will die happy in
your madhouse, only because I know what I know.  Let it be
granted, then--MacIan is a mystic; MacIan is a maniac.  But this
honest shopkeeper and editor whom I have dragged on my inhuman
escapades, you cannot keep him.  He will go free, thank God, he is
not down in any damned document.  His ancestor, I am certain, did
not die at Culloden.  His mother, I swear, had no relics.  Let my
friend out of your front door, and as for me----"

The doctor had already gone across to the laden shelves, and
after a few minutes' short-sighted peering, had pulled down
another parallelogram of dark-red wood.

This also he unlocked on the table, and with the same unerring
egotistic eye on of the company saw the words, written in large
letters: "Turnbull, James."

Hitherto Turnbull himself had somewhat scornfully surrendered his
part in the whole business; but he was too honest and unaffected
not to start at his own name.  After the name, the inscription
appeared to run: "Unique case of Eleutheromania.  Parentage, as so
often in such cases, prosaic and healthy.  Eleutheromaniac signs
occurred early, however, leading him to attach himself to the
individualist Bradlaugh.  Recent outbreak of pure anarchy----"

Turnbull slammed the case to, almost smashing it, and said with a
burst of savage laughter: "Oh! come along, MacIan; I don't care
so much, even about getting out of the madhouse, if only we get
out of this room.  You were right enough, MacIan, when you spoke
about--about mad doctors."

Somehow they found themselves outside in the cool, green garden,
and then, after a stunned silence, Turnbull said: "There is one
thing that was puzzling me all the time, and I understand it
now."

"What do you mean?" asked Evan.

"No man by will or wit," answered Turnbull, "can get out of this
garden; and yet we got into it merely by jumping over a garden
wall.  The whole thing explains itself easily enough.  That
undefended wall was an open trap.  It was a trap laid for two
celebrated lunatics.  They saw us get in right enough.  And they
will see that we do not get out."

Evan gazed at the garden wall, gravely for more than a minute,
and then he nodded without a word.



XV. THE DREAM OF MACIAN

The system of espionage in the asylum was so effective and
complete that in practice the patients could often enjoy a sense
of almost complete solitude.  They could stray up so near to the
wall in an apparently unwatched garden as to find it easy to jump
over it.  They would only have found the error of their
calculations if they had tried to jump.

Under this insulting liberty, in this artificial loneliness, Evan
MacIan was in the habit of creeping out into the garden after
dark--especially upon moonlight nights.  The moon, indeed, was for
him always a positive magnet in a manner somewhat hard to explain
to those of a robuster attitude.  Evidently, Apollo is to the full
as poetical as Diana; but it is not a question of poetry in the
matured and intellectual sense of the word.  It is a question of a
certain solid and childish fancy.  The sun is in the strict and
literal sense invisible; that is to say, that by our bodily eyes
it cannot properly be seen.  But the moon is a much simpler thing;
a naked and nursery sort of thing.  It hangs in the sky quite
solid and quite silver and quite useless; it is one huge
celestial snowball.  It was at least some such infantile facts and
fancies which led Evan again and again during his dehumanized
imprisonment to go out as if to shoot the moon.

He was out in the garden on one such luminous and ghostly night,
when the steady moonshine toned down all the colours of the
garden until almost the strongest tints to be seen were the
strong soft blue of the sky and the large lemon moon.  He was
walking with his face turned up to it in that rather half-witted
fashion which might have excused the error of his keepers; and as
he gazed he became aware of something little and lustrous flying
close to the lustrous orb, like a bright chip knocked off the
moon.  At first he thought it was a mere sparkle or refraction in
his own eyesight; he blinked and cleared his eyes.  Then he
thought it was a falling star; only it did not fall.  It jerked
awkwardly up and down in a way unknown among meteors and
strangely reminiscent of the works of man.  The next moment the
thing drove right across the moon, and from being silver upon
blue, suddenly became black upon silver; then although it passed
the field of light in a flash its outline was unmistakable though
eccentric.  It was a flying ship.

The vessel took one long and sweeping curve across the sky and
came nearer and nearer to MacIan, like a steam-engine coming
round a bend.  It was of pure white steel, and in the moon it
gleamed like the armour of Sir Galahad.  The simile of such
virginity is not inappropriate; for, as it grew larger and larger
and lower and lower, Evan saw that the only figure in it was
robed in white from head to foot and crowned with snow-white
hair, on which the moonshine lay like a benediction.  The figure
stood so still that he could easily have supposed it to be a
statue.  Indeed, he thought it was until it spoke.

"Evan," said the voice, and it spoke with the simple authority of
some forgotten father revisiting his children, "you have remained
here long enough, and your sword is wanted elsewhere."

"Wanted for what?" asked the young man, accepting the monstrous
event with a queer and clumsy naturalness; "what is my sword
wanted for?"

"For all that you hold dear," said the man standing in the
moonlight; "for the thrones of authority and for all ancient
loyalty to law."

Evan looked up at the lunar orb again as if in irrational
appeal--a moon calf bleating to his mother the moon.  But the face
of Luna seemed as witless as his own; there is no help in nature
against the supernatural; and he looked again at the tall marble
figure that might have been made out of solid moonlight.

Then he said in a loud voice: "Who are you?" and the next moment
was seized by a sort of choking terror lest his question should
be answered.  But the unknown preserved an impenetrable silence
for a long space and then only answered: "I must not say who I am
until the end of the world; but I may say what I am.  I am the
law."

And he lifted his head so that the moon smote full upon his
beautiful and ancient face.

The face was the face of a Greek god grown old, but not grown
either weak or ugly; there was nothing to break its regularity
except a rather long chin with a cleft in it, and this rather
added distinction than lessened beauty.  His strong, well-opened
eyes were very brilliant but quite colourless like steel.

MacIan was one of those to whom a reverence and self-submission
in ritual come quite easy, and are ordinary things.  It was not
artificial in him to bend slightly to this solemn apparition or
to lower his voice when he said: "Do you bring me some message?"

"I do bring you a message," answered the man of moon and marble.
"The king has returned."

Evan did not ask for or require any explanation.  "I suppose you
can take me to the war," he said, and the silent silver figure
only bowed its head again.  MacIan clambered into the silver boat,
and it rose upward to the stars.

To say that it rose to the stars is no mere metaphor, for the sky
had cleared to that occasional and astonishing transparency in
which one can see plainly both stars and moon.

As the white-robed figure went upward in his white chariot, he
said quite quietly to Evan: "There is an answer to all the folly
talked about equality.  Some stars are big and some small; some
stand still and some circle around them as they stand.  They can
be orderly, but they cannot be equal."

"They are all very beautiful," said Evan, as if in doubt.

"They are all beautiful," answered the other, "because each is in
his place and owns his superior.  And now England will be
beautiful after the same fashion.  The earth will be as beautiful
as the heavens, because our kings have come back to us."

"The Stuart----" began Evan, earnestly.

"Yes," answered the old man, "that which has returned is Stuart
and yet older than Stuart.  It is Capet and Plantagenet and
Pendragon.  It is all that good old time of which proverbs tell,
that golden reign of Saturn against which gods and men were
rebels.  It is all that was ever lost by insolence and overwhelmed
in rebellion.  It is your own forefather, MacIan with the broken
sword, bleeding without hope at Culloden.  It is Charles refusing
to answer the questions of the rebel court.  It is Mary of the
magic face confronting the gloomy and grasping peers and the
boorish moralities of Knox.  It is Richard, the last Plantagenet,
giving his crown to Bolingbroke as to a common brigand.  It is
Arthur, overwhelmed in Lyonesse by heathen armies and dying in
the mist, doubtful if ever he shall return."

"But now----" said Evan, in a low voice.

"But now!" said the old man; "he has returned."

"Is the war still raging?" asked MacIan.

"It rages like the pit itself beyond the sea whither I am taking
you," answered the other.  "But in England the king enjoys his own
again.  The people are once more taught and ruled as is best; they
are happy knights, happy squires, happy servants, happy serfs, if
you will; but free at last of that load of vexation and lonely
vanity which was called being a citizen."

"Is England, indeed, so secure?" asked Evan.

"Look out and see," said the guide.  "I fancy you have seen this
place before."

They were driving through the air towards one region of the sky
where the hollow of night seemed darkest and which was quite
without stars.  But against this black background there sprang up,
picked out in glittering silver, a dome and a cross.  It seemed
that it was really newly covered with silver, which in the strong
moonlight was like white flame.  But, however, covered or painted,
Evan had no difficult in knowing the place again.  He saw the
great thoroughfare that sloped upward to the base of its huge
pedestal of steps.  And he wondered whether the little shop was
still by the side of it and whether its window had been mended.

As the flying ship swept round the dome he observed other
alterations.  The dome had been redecorated so as to give it a
more solemn and somewhat more ecclesiastical note; the ball was
draped or destroyed, and round the gallery, under the cross, ran
what looked like a ring of silver statues, like the little leaden
images that stood round the hat of Louis XI.  Round the second
gallery, at the base of the dome, ran a second rank of such
images, and Evan thought there was another round the steps below.
When they came closer he saw that they were figures in complete
armour of steel or silver, each with a naked sword, point upward;
and then he saw one of the swords move.  These were not statues
but an armed order of chivalry thrown in three circles round the
cross.  MacIan drew in his breath, as children do at anything they
think utterly beautiful.  For he could imagine nothing that so
echoed his own visions of pontifical or chivalric art as this
white dome sitting like a vast silver tiara over London, ringed
with a triple crown of swords.

As they went sailing down Ludgate Hill, Evan saw that the state
of the streets fully answered his companion's claim about the
reintroduction of order.  All the old blackcoated bustle with its
cockney vivacity and vulgarity had disappeared.  Groups of
labourers, quietly but picturesquely clad, were passing up and
down in sufficiently large numbers; but it required but a few
mounted men to keep the streets in order.  The mounted men were
not common policemen, but knights with spurs and plume whose
smooth and splendid armour glittered like diamond rather than
steel.  Only in one place--at the corner of Bouverie Street--did
there appear to be a moment's confusion, and that was due to
hurry rather than resistance.  But one old grumbling man did not
get out of the way quick enough, and the man on horseback struck
him, not severely, across the shoulders with the flat of his
sword.

"The soldier had no business to do that," said MacIan, sharply.
"The old man was moving as quickly as he could."

"We attach great importance to discipline in the streets," said
the man in white, with a slight smile.

"Discipline is not so important as justice," said MacIan.

The other did not answer.

Then after a swift silence that took them out across St. James's
Park, he said: "The people must be taught to obey; they must
learn their own ignorance.  And I am not sure," he continued,
turning his back on Evan and looking out of the prow of the ship
into the darkness, "I am not sure that I agree with your little
maxim about justice.  Discipline for the whole society is surely
more important than justice to an individual."

Evan, who was also leaning over the edge, swung round with
startling suddenness and stared at the other's back.

"Discipline for society----" he repeated, very staccato, "more
important--justice to individual?"

Then after a long silence he called out: "Who and what are you?"

"I am an angel," said the white-robed figure, without turning
round.

"You are not a Catholic," said MacIan.

The other seemed to take no notice, but reverted to the main
topic.

"In our armies up in heaven we learn to put a wholesome fear into
subordinates."

MacIan sat craning his neck forward with an extraordinary and
unaccountable eagerness.

"Go on!" he cried, twisting and untwisting his long, bony
fingers, "go on!"

"Besides," continued he, in the prow, "you must allow for a
certain high spirit and haughtiness in the superior type."

"Go on!" said Evan, with burning eyes.

"Just as the sight of sin offends God," said the unknown, "so
does the sight of ugliness offend Apollo.  The beautiful and
princely must, of necessity, be impatient with the squalid
and----"

"Why, you great fool!" cried MacIan, rising to the top of his
tremendous stature, "did you think I would have doubted only for
that rap with a sword?  I know that noble orders have bad knights,
that good knights have bad tempers, that the Church has rough
priests and coarse cardinals; I have known it ever since I was
born.  You fool! you had only to say, 'Yes, it is rather a shame,'
and I should have forgotten the affair.  But I saw on your mouth
the twitch of your infernal sophistry; I knew that something was
wrong with you and your cathedrals.  Something is wrong;
everything is wrong.  You are not an angel.  That is not a church.
It is not the rightful king who has come home."

"That is unfortunate," said the other, in a quiet but hard voice,
"because you are going to see his Majesty."

"No," said MacIan, "I am going to jump over the side."

"Do you desire death?"

"No," said Evan, quite composedly, "I desire a miracle."

"From whom do you ask it?  To whom do you appeal?" said his
companion, sternly.  "You have betrayed the king, renounced his
cross on the cathedral, and insulted an archangel."

"I appeal to God," said Evan, and sprang up and stood upon the
edge of the swaying ship.

The being in the prow turned slowly round; he looked at Evan with
eyes which were like two suns, and put his hand to his mouth just
too late to hide an awful smile.

"And how do you know," he said, "how do you know that I am not
God?"

MacIan screamed.  "Ah!" he cried.  "Now I know who you really are.
You are not God.  You are not one of God's angels.  But you were
once."

The being's hand dropped from his mouth and Evan dropped out of
the car.



XVI. THE DREAM OF TURNBULL

Turnbull was walking rather rampantly up and down the garden on a
gusty evening chewing his cigar and in that mood when every man
suppresses an instinct to spit.  He was not, as a rule, a man much
acquainted with moods; and the storms and sunbursts of MacIan's
soul passed before him as an impressive but unmeaning panorama,
like the anarchy of Highland scenery.  Turnbull was one of those
men in whom a continuous appetite and industry of the intellect
leave the emotions very simple and steady.  His heart was in the
right place; but he was quite content to leave it there.  It was
his head that was his hobby.  His mornings and evenings were
marked not by impulses or thirsty desires, not by hope or by
heart-break; they were filled with the fallacies he had detected,
the problems he had made plain, the adverse theories he had
wrestled with and thrown, the grand generalizations he had
justified.  But even the cheerful inner life of a logician may be
upset by a lunatic asylum, to say nothing of whiffs of memory
from a lady in Jersey, and the little red-bearded man on this
windy evening was in a dangerous frame of mind.

Plain and positive as he was, the influence of earth and sky may
have been greater on him than he imagined; and the weather that
walked the world at that moment was as red and angry as Turnbull.
Long strips and swirls of tattered and tawny cloud were dragged
downward to the west exactly as torn red raiment would be
dragged.  And so strong and pitiless was the wind that it whipped
away fragments of red-flowering bushes or of copper beech, and
drove them also across the garden, a drift of red leaves, like
the leaves of autumn, as in parody of the red and driven rags of
cloud.

There was a sense in earth and heaven as of everything breaking
up, and all the revolutionist in Turnbull rejoiced that it was
breaking up.  The trees were breaking up under the wind, even in
the tall strength of their bloom: the clouds were breaking up and
losing even their large heraldic shapes.  Shards and shreds of
copper cloud split off continually and floated by themselves, and
for some reason the truculent eye of Turnbull was attracted to
one of these careering cloudlets, which seemed to him to career
in an exaggerated manner.  Also it kept its shape, which is
unusual with clouds shaken off; also its shape was of an odd
sort.

Turnbull continued to stare at it, and in a little time occurred
that crucial instant when a thing, however incredible, is
accepted as a fact.  The copper cloud was tumbling down towards
the earth, like some gigantic leaf from the copper beeches.  And
as it came nearer it was evident, first, that it was not a cloud,
and, second, that it was not itself of the colour of copper;
only, being burnished like a mirror, it had reflected the
red-brown colours of the burning clouds.  As the thing whirled
like a windswept leaf down towards the wall of the garden it was
clear that it was some sort of air-ship made of metal, and
slapping the air with big broad fins of steel.  When it came about
a hundred feet above the garden, a shaggy, lean figure leapt up
in it, almost black against the bronze and scarlet of the west,
and, flinging out a kind of hook or anchor, caught on to the
green apple-tree just under the wall; and from that fixed holding
ground the ship swung in the red tempest like a captive balloon.

While our friend stood frozen for an instant by his astonishment,
the queer figure in the airy car tipped the vehicle almost upside
down by leaping over the side of it, seemed to slide or drop down
the rope like a monkey, and alighted (with impossible precision
and placidity) seated on the edge of the wall, over which he
kicked and dangled his legs as he grinned at Turnbull.  The wind
roared in the trees yet more ruinous and desolate, the red tails
of the sunset were dragged downward like red dragons sucked down
to death, and still on the top of the asylum wall sat the
sinister figure with the grimace, swinging his feet in tune with
the tempest; while above him, at the end of its tossing or
tightened cord, the enormous iron air-ship floated as light and
as little noticed as a baby's balloon upon its string.

Turnbull's first movement after sixty motionless seconds was to
turn round and look at the large, luxuriant parallelogram of the
garden and the long, low rectangular building beyond.  There was
not a soul or a stir of life within sight.  And he had a quite
meaningless sensation, as if there never really had been any one
else there except he since the foundation of the world.

Stiffening in himself the masculine but mirthless courage of the
atheist, he drew a little nearer to the wall and, catching the
man at a slightly different angle of the evening light, could see
his face and figure quite plain.  Two facts about him stood out in
the picked colours of some piratical schoolboy's story.  The first
was that his lean brown body was bare to the belt of his loose
white trousers; the other that through hygiene, affectation, or
whatever other cause, he had a scarlet handkerchief tied tightly
but somewhat aslant across his brow.  After these two facts had
become emphatic, others appeared sufficiently important.  One was
that under the scarlet rag the hair was plentiful, but white as
with the last snows of mortality.  Another was that under the mop
of white and senile hair the face was strong, handsome, and
smiling, with a well-cut profile and a long cloven chin.  The
length of this lower part of the face and the strange cleft in it
(which gave the man, in quite another sense from the common one,
a double chin) faintly spoilt the claim of the face to absolute
regularity, but it greatly assisted it in wearing the expression
of half-smiling and half-sneering arrogance with which it was
staring at all the stones, all the flowers, but especially at the
solitary man.

"What do you want?" shouted Turnbull.

"I want you, Jimmy," said the eccentric man on the wall, and with
the very word he had let himself down with a leap on to the
centre of the lawn, where he bounded once literally like an
India-rubber ball and then stood grinning with his legs astride.
The only three facts that Turnbull could now add to his inventory
were that the man had an ugly-looking knife swinging at his
trousers belt, that his brown feet were as bare as his bronzed
trunk and arms, and that his eyes had a singular bleak brilliancy
