     Up the airy mountain,
       Down the rushy glen,
     We daren't go a-hunting
       For fear of little men.
     Wee folk, good folk,
       Trooping all together;
     Green jacket, red cap,
       And white owl's feather!

     Down along the rocky shore
       Some make their home--
     They live on crispy pancakes
       Of yellow tide-foam;
     Some in the reeds
       Of the black mountain-lake,
     With frogs for their watch-dogs,
       All night awake.

     High on the hilltop
       The old King sits;
     He is now so old and gray,
       He's nigh lost his wits.
     With a bridge of white mist
       Columbkill he crosses,
     On his stately journeys
       From Slieveleague to Rosses;
     Or going up with music
       On cold starry nights,
     To sup with the Queen
       Of the gay Northern Lights.

     They stole little Bridget
       For seven years long;
     When she came down again
       Her friends were all gone.
     They took her lightly back,
       Between the night and morrow;
     They thought that she was fast asleep,
       But she was dead with sorrow.
     They have kept her ever since
       Deep within the lake,
     On a bed of flag-leaves,
       Watching till she wake.

     By the craggy hillside,
       Through the mosses bare,
     They have planted thorn-trees,
       For pleasure here and there.
     Is any man so daring
       As dig them up in spite,
     He shall find their sharpest thorns
       In his bed at night.

     Up the airy mountain,
       Down the rushy glen,
     We daren't go a-hunting
       For fear of little men.
     Wee folk, good folk,
       Trooping all together;
     Green jacket, red cap,
       And white owl's feather!




THE ADVENTURES OF THE LITTLE FIELD MOUSE


Once upon a time, there was a little brown Field Mouse; and one day he
was out in the fields to see what he could find. He was running along in
the grass, poking his nose into everything and looking with his two eyes
all about, when he saw a smooth, shiny acorn, lying in the grass. It was
such a fine shiny little acorn that he thought he would take it home
with him; so he put out his paw to touch it, but the little acorn rolled
away from him. He ran after it, but it kept rolling on, just ahead of
him, till it came to a place where a big oak-tree had its roots spread
all over the ground. Then it rolled under a big round root.

Little Mr Field Mouse ran to the root and poked his nose under after the
acorn, and there he saw a small round hole in the ground. He slipped
through and saw some stairs going down into the earth. The acorn was
rolling down, with a soft tapping sound, ahead of him, so down he went
too. Down, down, down, rolled the acorn, and down, down, down, went the
Field Mouse, until suddenly he saw a tiny door at the foot of the
stairs.

The shiny acorn rolled to the door and struck against it with a tap.
Quickly the little door opened and the acorn rolled inside. The Field
Mouse hurried as fast as he could down the last stairs, and pushed
through just as the door was closing. It shut behind him, and he was in
a little room. And there, before him, stood a queer little Red Man! He
had a little red cap, and a little red jacket, and odd little red shoes
with points at the toes.

"You are my prisoner," he said to the Field Mouse.

"What for?" said the Field Mouse.

"Because you tried to steal my acorn," said the little Red Man.

"It is my acorn," said the Field Mouse; "I found it."

"No, it isn't," said the little Red Man, "I have it; you will never see
it again."

The little Field Mouse looked all about the room as fast as he could,
but he could not see any acorn. Then he thought he would go back up the
tiny stairs to his own home. But the little door was locked, and the
little Red Man had the key. And he said to the poor mouse,--

"You shall be my servant; you shall make my bed and sweep my room and
cook my broth."

So the little brown Mouse was the little Red Man's servant, and every
day he made the little Red Man's bed and swept the little Red Man's room
and cooked the little Red Man's broth. And every day the little Red Man
went away through the tiny door, and did not come back till afternoon.
But he always locked the door after him, and carried away the key.

At last, one day he was in such a hurry that he turned the key before
the door was quite latched, which, of course, didn't lock it at all. He
went away without noticing,--he was in such a hurry.

The little Field Mouse knew that his chance had come to run away home.
But he didn't want to go without the pretty, shiny acorn. Where it was
he didn't know, so he looked everywhere. He opened every little drawer
and looked in, but it wasn't in any of the drawers; he peeped on every
shelf, but it wasn't on a shelf; he hunted in every closet, but it
wasn't in there. Finally, he climbed up on a chair and opened a wee, wee
door in the chimney-piece,--and there it was!

He took it quickly in his forepaws, and then he took it in his mouth,
and then he ran away. He pushed open the little door; he climbed up, up,
up the little stairs; he came out through the hole under the root; he
ran and ran through the fields; and at last he came to his own house.

When he was in his own house he set the shiny acorn on the table. I
expect he set it down hard, for all at once, with a little snap, it
opened!--exactly like a little box.

And what do you think! There was a tiny necklace inside! It was a most
beautiful tiny necklace, all made of jewels, and it was just big enough
for a lady mouse. So the little Field Mouse gave the tiny necklace to
his little Mouse-sister. She thought it was perfectly lovely. And when
she wasn't wearing it she kept it in the shiny acorn box.

And the little Red Man never knew what had become of it, because he
didn't know where the little Field Mouse lived.




ANOTHER LITTLE RED HEN


Once upon a time there was a little Red Hen, who lived on a farm all by
herself. An old Fox, crafty and sly, had a den in the rocks, on a hill
near her house. Many and many a night this old Fox used to lie awake
and think to himself how good that little Red Hen would taste if he
could once get her in his big kettle and boil her for dinner. But he
couldn't catch the little Red Hen, because she was too wise for him.
Every time she went out to market she locked the door of the house
behind her, and as soon as she came in again she locked the door behind
her and put the key in her apron pocket, where she kept her scissors and
some sugar candy.

At last the old Fox thought out a way to catch the little Red Hen. Early
in the morning he said to his old mother, "Have the kettle boiling when
I come home to-night, for I'll be bringing the little Red Hen for
supper." Then he took a big bag and slung it over his shoulder, and
walked till he came to the little Red Hen's house. The little Red Hen
was just coming out of her door to pick up a few sticks for firewood. So
the old Fox hid behind the wood-pile, and as soon as she bent down to
get a stick, into the house he slipped, and scurried behind the door.

In a minute the little Red Hen came quickly in, and shut the door and
locked it. "I'm glad I'm safely in," she said. Just as she said it, she
turned round, and there stood the ugly old Fox, with his big bag over
his shoulder. Whiff! how scared the little Red Hen was! She dropped her
apronful of sticks, and flew up to the big beam across the ceiling.
There she perched, and she said to the old Fox, down below, "You may as
well go home, for you can't get me."

"Can't I, though!" said the Fox. And what do you think he did? He stood
on the floor underneath the little Red Hen and twirled round in a circle
after his own tail. And as he spun, and spun, and spun, faster, and
faster, and faster, the poor little Red Hen got so dizzy watching him
that she couldn't hold on to the perch. She dropped off, and the old Fox
picked her up and put her in his bag, slung the bag over his shoulder,
and started for home, where the kettle was boiling.

He had a very long way to go, up hill, and the little Red Hen was still
so dizzy that she didn't know where she was. But when the dizziness
began to go off, she whisked her little scissors out of her apron
pocket, and snip! she cut a little hole in the bag; then she poked her
head out and saw where she was, and as soon as they came to a good spot
she cut the hole bigger and jumped out herself. There was a great big
stone lying there, and the little Red Hen picked it up and put it in the
bag as quick as a wink. Then she ran as fast as she could till she came
to her own little farmhouse, and she went in and locked the door with
the big key.

The old Fox went on carrying the stone and never knew the difference.
My, but it bumped him well! He was pretty tired when he got home. But he
was so pleased to think of the supper he was going to have that he did
not mind that at all. As soon as his mother opened the door he said, "Is
the kettle boiling?"

"Yes," said his mother; "have you got the little Red Hen?"

"I have," said the old Fox. "When I open the bag you hold the cover off
the kettle and I'll shake the bag so that the Hen will fall in, and then
you pop the cover on, before she can jump out."

"All right," said his mean old mother; and she stood close by the
boiling kettle, ready to put the cover on.

The Fox lifted the big, heavy bag up till it was over the open kettle,
and gave it a shake. Splash! thump! splash! In went the stone and out
came the boiling water, all over the old Fox and the old Fox's mother!

And they were scalded to death.

But the little Red Hen lived happily ever after, in her own little
farmhouse.





THE STORY OF THE LITTLE RID HIN


     There was once't upon a time
       A little small Rid Hin,
     Off in the good ould country
       Where yees ha' nivir bin.

     Nice and quiet shure she was,
       And nivir did any harrum;
     She lived alane all be herself,
       And worked upon her farrum.

     There lived out o'er the hill,
       In a great din o' rocks,
     A crafty, shly, and wicked
       Ould folly iv a Fox.

     This rashkill iv a Fox,
       He tuk it in his head
     He'd have the little Rid Hin:
       So, whin he wint to bed,

     He laid awake and thaught
       What a foine thing 'twad be
     To fetch her home and bile her up
       For his ould marm and he.

     And so he thaught and thaught,
       Until he grew so thin
     That there was nothin' left of him
       But jist his bones and shkin.

     But the small Rid Hin was wise,
       She always locked her door,
     And in her pocket pit the key,
       To keep the Fox out shure.

     But at last there came a schame
       Intil his wicked head,
     And he tuk a great big bag
       And to his mither said,--

     "Now have the pot all bilin'
       Agin the time I come;
     We'll ate the small Rid Hin to-night,
       For shure I'll bring her home."

     And so away he wint
       Wid the bag upon his back,
     An' up the hill and through the woods
       Saftly he made his track.

     An' thin he came alang,
       Craping as shtill's a mouse,
     To where the little small Rid Hin
       Lived in her shnug ould house.

     An' out she comes hersel',
       Jist as he got in sight,
     To pick up shticks to make her fire:
       "Aha!" says Fox, "all right.

     "Begorra, now, I'll have yees
       Widout much throuble more";
     An' in he shlips quite unbeknownst,
       An' hides be'ind the door.

     An' thin, a minute afther,
       In comes the small Rid Hin,
     An' shuts the door, and locks it, too,
       An' thinks, "I'm safely in."

     An' thin she tarns around
       An' looks be'ind the door;
     There shtands the Fox wid his big tail
       Shpread out upon the floor.

     Dear me! she was so schared
       Wid such a wondrous sight,
     She dropped her apronful of shticks,
       An' flew up in a fright,

     An' lighted on the bame
       Across on top the room;
     "Aha!" says she, "ye don't have me;
       Ye may as well go home."

     "Aha!" says Fox, "we'll see;
       I'll bring yees down from that."
     So out he marched upon the floor
       Right under where she sat.

     An' thin he whiruled around,
       An' round an' round an' round,
     Fashter an' fashter an' fashter,
       Afther his tail on the ground.

     Until the small Rid Hin
       She got so dizzy, shure,
     Wid lookin' at the Fox's tail,
       She jist dropped on the floor.

     An' Fox he whipped her up,
       An' pit her in his bag,
     An' off he started all alone,
       Him and his little dag.

     All day he tracked the wood
       Up hill an' down again;
     An' wid him, shmotherin' in the bag,
       The little small Rid Hin.

     Sorra a know she knowed
       Awhere she was that day;
     Says she, "I'm biled an' ate up, shure
       An' what'll be to pay?"

     Thin she betho't hersel',
       An' tuk her schissors out,
     An' shnipped a big hole in the bag,
       So she could look about.

     An' 'fore ould Fox could think
       She lept right out--she did,
     An' thin picked up a great big shtone,
       An' popped it in instid.

     An' thin she rins off home,
       Her outside door she locks;
     Thinks she, "You see you don't have me,
       You crafty, shly ould Fox."

     An' Fox he tugged away
       Wid the great big hivy shtone,
     Thimpin' his shoulders very bad
       As he wint in alone.

     An' whin he came in sight
       O' his great din o' rocks,
     Jist watchin' for him at the door
       He shpied ould mither Fox.

     "Have ye the pot a-bilin'?"
       Says he to ould Fox thin;
     "Shure an' it is, me child," says she;
       "Have ye the small Rid Hin?"

     "Yes, jist here in me bag,
       As shure as I shtand here;
     Open the lid till I pit her in:
       Open it--nivir fear."

     So the rashkill cut the shtring,
       An' hild the big bag over;
     "Now when I shake it in," says he,
       "Do ye pit on the cover."

     "Yis, that I will"; an' thin
       The shtone wint in wid a dash,
     An' the pot o' bilin' wather
       Came over them ker-splash.

     An' schalted 'em both to death,
       So they couldn't brathe no more;
     An' the little small Rid Hin lived safe,
       Jist where she lived before.




THE STORY OF EPAMINONDAS AND HIS AUNTIE


Epaminondas used to go to see his Auntie 'most every day, and she nearly
always gave him something to take home to his Mammy.

One day she gave him a big piece of cake; nice, yellow, rich gold-cake.

Epaminondas took it in his fist and held it all crunched up tight, like
this, and came along home. By the time he got home there wasn't anything
left but a fistful of crumbs. His Mammy said,--

"What you got there, Epaminondas?"

"Cake, Mammy," said Epaminondas.

"Cake!" said his Mammy. "Epaminondas, you ain't got the sense you was
born with! That's no way to carry cake. The way to carry cake is to wrap
it all up nice in some leaves and put it in your hat, and put your hat
on your head, and come along home. You hear me, Epaminondas?"

"Yes, Mammy," said Epaminondas.

Next day Epaminondas went to see his Auntie, and she gave him a pound of
butter for his Mammy; fine, fresh, sweet butter.

Epaminondas wrapped it up in leaves and put it in his hat, and put his
hat on his head, and came along home. It was a very hot day. Pretty soon
the butter began to melt. It melted, and melted, and as it melted it ran
down Epaminondas' forehead; then it ran over his face, and in his ears,
and down his neck. When he got home, all the butter Epaminondas had was
_on him_. His Mammy looked at him, and then she said,--

"Law's sake! Epaminondas, what you got in your hat?"

"Butter, Mammy," said Epaminondas; "Auntie gave it to me."

"Butter!" said his Mammy. "Epaminondas, you ain't got the sense you was
born with! Don't you know that's no way to carry butter? The way to
carry butter is to wrap it up in some leaves and take it down to the
brook, and cool it in the water, and cool it in the water, and cool it
in the water, and then take it on your hands, careful, and bring it
along home."

"Yes, Mammy," said Epaminondas.

By and by, another day, Epaminondas went to see his Auntie again, and;
this time she gave him a little new puppy-dog to take home.

Epaminondas put it in some leaves and took it down to the brook; and
there he cooled it in the water, and cooled it in the water, and cooled
it in the water; then he took it in his hands and came along home. When
he got home, the puppy-dog was dead. His Mammy looked at it, and she
said,--

"Law's sake! Epaminondas, what you got there?"

"A puppy-dog, Mammy," said Epaminondas.

"A _puppy-dog_!" said his Mammy. "My gracious sakes alive, Epaminondas,
you ain't got the sense you was born with! That ain't the way to carry a
puppy-dog! The way to carry a puppy-dog is to take a long piece of
string and tie one end of it round the puppy-dog's neck and put the
puppy-dog on the ground, and take hold of the other end of the string
and come along home, like this."

"All right, Mammy," said Epaminondas.

Next day Epaminondas went to see his Auntie again, and when he came to
go home she gave him a loaf of bread to carry to his Mammy; a brown,
fresh, crusty loaf of bread.

So Epaminondas tied a string around the end of the loaf and took hold of
the end of the string and came along home, like this. (Imitate dragging
something along the ground.) When he got home his Mammy looked at the
thing on the end of the string, and she said,--

"My laws a-massy! Epaminondas, what you got on the end of that string?"

"Bread, Mammy," said Epaminondas; "Auntie gave it to me."

"Bread!!!" said his Mammy. "O Epaminondas, Epaminondas, you ain't got
the sense you was born with; you never did have the sense you was born
with; you never will have the sense you was born with! Now I ain't gwine
tell you any more ways to bring truck home. And don't you go see your
Auntie, neither. I'll go see her my own self. But I'll just tell you one
thing, Epaminondas! You see these here six mince pies I done make? You
see how I done set 'em on the doorstep to cool? Well, now, you hear me,
Epaminondas, _you be careful how you step on those pies_!"

"Yes, Mammy," said Epaminondas.

Then Epaminondas' Mammy put on her bonnet and her shawl and took a
basket in her hand and went away to see Auntie. The six mince pies sat
cooling in a row on the doorstep.

And then,--and then,--Epaminondas _was_ careful how he stepped on those
pies!

He stepped (imitate)--right--in--the--middle--of--every--one.

       *       *       *       *       *

And, do you know, children, nobody knows what happened next! The person
who told me the story didn't know; nobody knows. But you can guess.




THE BOY WHO CRIED "WOLF!"


There was once a shepherd-boy who kept his flock at a little distance
from the village. Once he thought he would play a trick on the villagers
and have some fun at their expense. So he ran toward the village crying
out, with all his might,--

"Wolf! Wolf! Come and help! The wolves are at my lambs!"

The kind villagers left their work and ran to the field to help him. But
when they got there the boy laughed at them for their pains; there was
no wolf there.

Still another day the boy tried the same trick, and the villagers came
running to help and got laughed at again.

Then one day a wolf did break into the fold and began killing the lambs.
In great fright, the boy ran for help. "Wolf! Wolf!" he screamed. "There
is a wolf in the flock! Help!"

The villagers heard him, but they thought it was another mean trick; no
one paid the least attention, or went near him. And the shepherd-boy
lost all his sheep.

That is the kind of thing that happens to people who lie: even when they
tell the truth no one believes them.




THE FROG KING


Did you ever hear the old story about the foolish Frogs? The Frogs in a
certain swamp decided that they needed a king; they had always got along
perfectly well without one, but they suddenly made up their minds that a
king they must have. They sent a messenger to Jove and begged him to
send a king to rule over them.

Jove saw how stupid they were, and sent a king who could not harm them:
he tossed a big log into the middle of the pond.

At the splash the Frogs were terribly frightened, and dived into their
holes to hide from King Log. But after a while, when they saw that the
king never moved, they got over their fright and went and sat on him.
And as soon as they found he really could not hurt them they began to
despise him; and finally they sent another messenger to Jove to ask for
a new king.

Jove sent an eel.

The Frogs were much pleased and a good deal frightened when King Eel
came wriggling and swimming among them. But as the days went on, and the
eel was perfectly harmless, they stopped being afraid; and as soon as
they stopped fearing King Eel they stopped respecting him.

Soon they sent a third messenger to Jove, and begged that they might
have a better king,--a king who was worth while.

It was too much; Jove was angry at their stupidity at last. "I will give
you a king such as you deserve!" he said; and he sent them a Stork.

As soon as the Frogs came to the surface to greet the new king, King
Stork caught them in his long bill and gobbled them up. One after
another they came bobbing up, and one after another the stork ate them.
He was indeed a king worthy of them!




THE SUN AND THE WIND


The Sun and the Wind once had a quarrel as to which was the stronger.
Each believed himself to be the more powerful. While they were arguing
they saw a traveller walking along the country highway, wearing a great
cloak.

"Here is a chance to test our strength," said the Wind; "let us see
which of us is strong enough to make that traveller take off his cloak;
the one who can do that shall be acknowledged the more powerful."

"Agreed," said the Sun.

Instantly the Wind began to blow; he puffed and tugged at the man's
cloak, and raised a storm of hail and rain, to beat at it. But the
colder it grew and the more it stormed, the tighter the traveller held
his cloak around him. The Wind could not get it off.

Now it was the Sun's turn. He shone with all his beams on the man's
shoulders. As it grew hotter and hotter, the man unfastened his cloak;
then he threw it back; at last he took it off! The Sun had won.




THE LITTLE JACKAL AND THE ALLIGATOR


The little Jackal was very fond of shell-fish. He used to go down by the
river and hunt along the edges for crabs and such things. And once, when
he was hunting for crabs, he was so hungry that he put his paw into the
water after a crab without looking first,--which you never should do!
The minute he put in his paw, _snap_!--the big Alligator who lives in
the mud down there had it in his jaws.

"Oh, dear!" thought the little Jackal; "the big Alligator has my paw in
his mouth! In another minute he will pull me down and gobble me up! What
shall I do? what shall I do?" Then he thought, suddenly, "I'll deceive
him!"

So he put on a very cheerful voice, as if nothing at all were the
matter, and he said,--

"Ho! ho! Clever Mr Alligator! Smart Mr Alligator, to take that old
bulrush root for my paw! I hope you'll find it very tender!"

The old Alligator was hidden away beneath the mud and bulrush leaves,
and he couldn't see anything. He thought, "Pshaw! I've made a mistake."
So he opened his mouth and let the little Jackal go.

The little Jackal ran away as fast as he could, and as he ran he called
out,--

"Thank you, Mr Alligator! Kind Mr Alligator! _So_ kind of you to let me
go!"

The old Alligator lashed with his tail and snapped with his jaws, but it
was too late; the little Jackal was out of reach.

After this the little Jackal kept away from the river, out of danger.
But after about a week he got such an appetite for crabs that nothing
else would do at all; he felt that he must have a crab. So he went down
by the river and looked all around, very carefully. He didn't see the
old Alligator, but he thought to himself, "I think I'll not take any
chances." So he stood still and began to talk out loud to himself. He
said,--

"When I don't see any little crabs on the land I generally see them
sticking out of the water, and then I put my paw in and catch them. I
wonder if there are any fat little crabs in the water to-day?"

The old Alligator was hidden down in the mud at the bottom of the river,
and when he heard what the little Jackal said, he thought, "Aha! I'll
pretend to be a little crab, and when he puts his paw in, I'll make my
dinner of him." So he stuck the black end of his snout above the water
and waited.

The little Jackal took one look, and then he said,--

"Thank you, Mr Alligator! Kind Mr Alligator! You are _exceedingly_ kind
to show me where you are! I will have dinner elsewhere." And he ran away
like the wind.

The old Alligator foamed at the mouth, he was so angry, but the little
Jackal was gone.

For two whole weeks the little Jackal kept away from the river. Then,
one day he got a feeling inside him that nothing but crabs could
satisfy: he felt that he must have at least one crab. Very cautiously,
he went down to the river and looked all around. He saw no sign of the
old Alligator. Still, he did not mean to take any chances. So he stood
quite still and began to talk to himself,--it was a little way he had.
He said,--

"When I don't see any little crabs on the shore, or sticking up out of
the water, I usually see them blowing bubbles from under the water; the
little bubbles go _puff, puff, puff_, and then they go _pop, pop, pop_,
and they show me where the little juicy crabs are, so I can put my paw
in and catch them. I wonder if I shall see any little bubbles to-day?"

The old Alligator, lying low in the mud and weeds, heard this, and he
thought, "Pooh! _That's_ easy enough; I'll just blow some little
crab-bubbles, and then he will put his paw in where I can get it."

So he blew, and he blew, a mighty blast, and the bubbles rose in a
perfect whirlpool, fizzing and swirling.

The little Jackal didn't have to be told who was underneath those
bubbles: he took one quick look, and off he ran. But as he went, he
sang,--

"Thank you, Mr Alligator! Kind Mr Alligator! You are the kindest
Alligator in the world, to show me where you are, so nicely! I'll
breakfast at another part of the river."

The old Alligator was so furious that he crawled up on the bank and went
after the little Jackal; but, dear, dear, he couldn't catch the little
Jackal; he ran far too fast.

After this, the little Jackal did not like to risk going near the water,
so he ate no more crabs. But he found a garden of wild figs, which were
so good that he went there every day, and ate them instead of
shell-fish.

Now the old Alligator found this out, and he made up his mind to have
the little Jackal for supper, or to die trying. So he crept, and
crawled, and dragged himself over the ground to the garden of wild figs.
There he made a huge pile of figs under the biggest of the wild fig
trees, and hid himself in the pile.

After a while the little Jackal came dancing into the garden, very happy
and free from care,--_but_ looking all around. He saw the huge pile of
figs under the big fig tree.

"H-m," he thought, "that looks singularly like my friend, the Alligator.
I'll investigate a bit."

He stood quite still and began to talk to himself,--it was a little way
he had. He said,--

"The little figs I like best are the fat, ripe, juicy ones that drop off
when the breeze blows; and then the wind blows them about on the ground,
this way and that; the great heap of figs over there is so still that I
think they must be all bad figs."

The old Alligator, underneath his fig pile, thought,--

"Bother the suspicious little Jackal! I shall have to make these figs
roll about, so that he will think the wind moves them." And straight-way
he humped himself up and moved, and sent the little figs flying,--and
his back showed through.

The little Jackal did not wait for a second look. He ran out of the
garden like the wind. But as he ran he called back,--

"Thank you, again, Mr Alligator; very sweet of you to show me where you
are; I can't stay to thank you as I should like: good-bye!"

At this the old Alligator was beside himself with rage. He vowed that he
would have the little Jackal for supper this time, come what might. So
he crept and crawled over the ground till he came to the little Jackal's
house. Then he crept and crawled inside, and hid himself there in the
house, to wait till the little Jackal should come home.

By and by the little Jackal came dancing home, happy and free from
care,--_but_ looking all around. Presently, as he came along, he saw
that the ground was all raked up as if something very heavy had been
dragged over it. The little Jackal stopped and looked.

"What's this? what's this?" he said.

Then he saw that the door of his house was crushed at the sides and
broken, as if something very big had gone through it.

"What's this? What's this?" the little Jackal said. "I think I'll
investigate a little!"

So he stood quite still and began to talk to himself (you remember, it
was a little way he had), but loudly. He said,--

"How strange that my little House doesn't speak to me! Why don't you
speak to me, little House? You always speak to me, if everything is all
right, when I come home. I wonder if anything is wrong with my little
House?"

The old Alligator thought to himself that he must certainly pretend to
be the little House, or the little Jackal would never come in. So he put
on as pleasant a voice as he could (which is not saying much) and
said,--

"Hullo, little Jackal!"

Oh! When the little Jackal heard that, he was frightened enough, for
once.

"It's the old Alligator," he said, "and if I don't make an end of him
this time he will certainly make an end of me. What shall I do?"

He thought very fast. Then he spoke out pleasantly.

"Thank you, little House," he said, "it's good to hear your pretty
voice, dear little House, and I will be in with you in a minute; only
first I must gather some firewood for dinner."

Then he went and gathered firewood, and more firewood, and more
firewood; and he piled it all up solid against the door and round the
house; and then he set fire to it!

And it smoked and burned till it smoked that old Alligator to smoked
herring!





THE LARKS IN THE CORNFIELD


There was once a family of little Larks who lived with their mother in a
nest in a cornfield. When the corn was ripe the mother Lark watched very
carefully to see if there were any sign of the reapers' coming, for she
knew that when they came their sharp knives would cut down the nest and
hurt the baby Larks. So every day, when she went out for food, she told
the little Larks to look and listen very closely to everything that
went on, and to tell her all they saw and heard when she came home.

One day when she came home the little Larks were much frightened.

"Oh, Mother, dear Mother," they said, "you must move us away to-night!
The farmer was in the field to-day, and he said, 'The corn is ready to
cut; we must call in the neighbours to help.' And then he told his son
to go out to-night and ask all the neighbours to come and reap the corn
to-morrow."

The mother Lark laughed. "Don't be frightened," she said; "if he waits
for his neighbours to reap the corn we shall have plenty of time to
move; tell me what he says to-morrow."

The next night the little Larks were quite trembling with fear; the
moment their mother got home they cried out, "Mother, you must surely
move us to-night! The farmer came to-day and said, 'The corn is getting
too ripe; we cannot wait for our neighbours; we must ask our relatives
to help us.' And then he called his son and told him to ask all the
uncles and cousins to come to-morrow and cut the corn. Shall we not move
to-night?"

"Don't worry," said the mother Lark; "the uncles and cousins have plenty
of reaping to do for themselves; we'll not move yet."

The third night, when the mother Lark came home, the baby Larks said,
"Mother, dear, the farmer came to the field to-day, and when he looked
at the corn he was quite angry; he said, 'This will never do! The corn
is getting too ripe; it's no use to wait for our relatives, we shall
have to cut this corn ourselves.' And then he called his son and said,
'Go out to-night and hire reapers, and to-morrow we will begin to cut.'"

"Well," said the mother, "that is another story; when a man begins to do
his own business, instead of asking somebody else to do it, things get
done. I will move you out to-night."




A TRUE STORY ABOUT A GIRL


Once there were four little girls who lived in a big, bare house, in the
country. They were very poor, but they had the happiest times you ever
heard of, because they were very rich in everything except money. They
had a wonderful, wise father, who knew stories to tell, and who taught
them their lessons in such a beautiful way that it was better than play;
they had a lovely, merry, kind mother, who was never too tired to help
them work or watch them play; and they had all the great green country
to play in. There were dark, shadowy woods, and fields of flowers, and a
river. And there was a big barn.

One of the little girls was named Louisa. She was very pretty, and ever
so strong; she could run for miles through the woods and not get tired.
She had a splendid brain in her little head; it liked study, and it
thought interesting thoughts all day long.

Louisa liked to sit in a corner by herself, sometimes, and write
thoughts in her diary; all the little girls kept diaries. She liked to
make up stories out of her own head, and sometimes she made verses.

When the four little sisters had finished their lessons, and had helped
their mother wash up and sew, they used to go to the big barn to play;
and the best play of all was theatricals. Louisa liked theatricals
better than anything.

They made the barn into a theatre, and the grown-up people came to see
the plays they acted. They used to climb up on the hay-loft for a stage,
and the grown people sat in chairs on the floor. It was great fun. One
of the plays they acted was _Jack and the Beanstalk_. They had a ladder
from the floor to the loft, and on the ladder they tied a vine all the
way up to the loft, to look like the wonderful beanstalk. One of the
little girls was dressed up to look like Jack, and she acted that part.
When it came to the place in the story where the giant tried to follow
Jack, the little girl cut down the beanstalk, and down came the giant
tumbling from the loft. The giant was made out of pillows, with a great,
fierce head of paper, and funny clothes.

Another story that they acted was _Cinderella_. They made a wonderful
big pumpkin out of the wheelbarrow, trimmed with yellow paper, and
Cinderella rolled away in it, when the fairy godmother waved her wand.

One other beautiful story they used to play. It was the story of
_Pilgrim's Progress_; if you have never heard it, you must be sure to
read it as soon as you can read well enough to understand the
old-fashioned words. The little girls used to put shells in their hats
for a sign they were on a pilgrimage, as the old pilgrims used to do;
then they made journeys over the hill behind the house, and through the
woods, and down the lanes; and when the pilgrimage was over they had
apples and nuts to eat, in the happy land of home.

Louisa loved all these plays, and she made some of her own and wrote
them down so that the children could act them.

But better than fun or writing Louisa loved her mother, and by and by,
as the little girl began to grow into a big girl, she felt very sad to
see her dear mother work so hard. She helped all she could with the
housework, but nothing could really help the tired mother except money;
she needed money for food and clothes, and someone grown up, to help in
the house. But there never was enough money for these things, and
Louisa's mother grew more and more weary, and sometimes ill. I cannot
tell you how much Louisa suffered over this.

At last, as Louisa thought about it, she came to care more about helping
her mother and her father and her sisters than about anything else in
all the world. And she began to work very hard to earn money. She sewed
for people, and when she was a little older she taught some little girls
their lessons, and then she wrote stories for the papers. Every bit of
money she earned, except what she had to use, she gave to her dear
family. It helped very much, but it was so little that Louisa never felt
as if she were doing anything.

Every year she grew more unselfish, and every year she worked harder.
She liked writing stories best of all her work, but she did not get much
money for them, and some people told her she was wasting her time.

At last, one day, a publisher asked Louisa, who was now a woman, to
write a book for girls. Louisa was not very well, and she was very
tired, but she always said, "I'll try," when she had a chance to work;
so she said, "I'll try," to the publisher. When she thought about the
book she remembered the good times she used to have with her sisters in
the big, bare house in the country. And so she wrote a story and put all
that in it; she put her dear mother and her wise father in it, and all
the little sisters, and besides the jolly times and the plays, she put
the sad, hard times in,--the work and worry and going without things.

When the book was written, she called it _Little Women_, and sent it to
the publisher.

And, children, the little book made Louisa famous. It was so sweet and
funny and sad and real,--like our own lives,--that everybody wanted to
read it. Everybody bought it, and much money came from it. After so many
years, little Louisa's wish came true: she bought a nice house for her
family; she sent one of her sisters to Europe, to study; she gave her
father books; but best of all, she was able to see to it that the
beloved mother, so tired and so ill, could have rest and happiness.
Never again did the dear mother have to do any hard work, and she had
pretty things about her all the rest of her life.

Louisa Alcott, for that was Louisa's name, wrote many beautiful books
after this, and she became one of the most famous women of America. But
I think the most beautiful thing about her is what I have been telling
you: that she loved her mother so well that she gave her whole life to
make her happy.




MY KINGDOM


The little Louisa I told you about, who wrote verses and stories in her
diary, used to like to play that she was a princess, and that her
kingdom was her own mind. When she had unkind or dissatisfied thoughts,
she tried to get rid of them by playing they were enemies of the
kingdom; and she drove them out with soldiers; the soldiers were
patience, duty, and love. It used to help Louisa to be good to play
this, and I think it may have helped make her the splendid woman she was
afterward. Maybe you would like to hear a poem she wrote about it, when
she was only fourteen years old. It will help you, too, to think the
same thoughts.

     A little kingdom I possess,
       Where thoughts and feelings dwell,
     And very hard I find the task
       Of governing it well;
     For passion tempts and troubles me,
       A wayward will misleads,
     And selfishness its shadow casts
       On all my words and deeds.

     How can I learn to rule myself,
       To be the child I should,
     Honest and brave, nor ever tire
       Of trying to be good?
     How can I keep a sunny soul
       To shine along life's way?
     How can I tune my little heart
       To sweetly sing all day?

     Dear Father, help me with the love
       That casteth out my fear,
     Teach me to lean on Thee, and feel
       That Thou art very near,
     That no temptation is unseen,
       No childish grief too small,
     Since Thou, with patience infinite,
       Doth soothe and comfort all.

     I do not ask for any crown
       But that which all may win,
     Nor seek to conquer any world,
       Except the one within.
     Be Thou my Guide until I find,
