22:25 Neither from a stranger's hand shall ye offer the bread of your
God of any of these; because their corruption is in them, and
blemishes be in them: they shall not be accepted for you.

22:26 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 22:27 When a bullock, or
a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, then it shall be seven days
under the dam; and from the eighth day and thenceforth it shall be
accepted for an offering made by fire unto the LORD.

22:28 And whether it be cow, or ewe, ye shall not kill it and her
young both in one day.

22:29 And when ye will offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the
LORD, offer it at your own will.

22:30 On the same day it shall be eaten up; ye shall leave none of it
until the morrow: I am the LORD.

22:31 Therefore shall ye keep my commandments, and do them: I am the
LORD.

22:32 Neither shall ye profane my holy name; but I will be hallowed
among the children of Israel: I am the LORD which hallow you, 22:33
That brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the
LORD.

23:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 23:2 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and say unto them, Concerning the feasts of the
LORD, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, even these are
my feasts.

23:3 Six days shall work be done: but the seventh day is the sabbath
of rest, an holy convocation; ye shall do no work therein: it is the
sabbath of the LORD in all your dwellings.

23:4 These are the feasts of the LORD, even holy convocations, which
ye shall proclaim in their seasons.

23:5 In the fourteenth day of the first month at even is the LORD's
passover.

23:6 And on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of
unleavened bread unto the LORD: seven days ye must eat unleavened
bread.

23:7 In the first day ye shall have an holy convocation: ye shall do
no servile work therein.

23:8 But ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD seven
days: in the seventh day is an holy convocation: ye shall do no
servile work therein.

23:9 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 23:10 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come into the land
which I give unto you, and shall reap the harvest thereof, then ye
shall bring a sheaf of the firstfruits of your harvest unto the
priest: 23:11 And he shall wave the sheaf before the LORD, to be
accepted for you: on the morrow after the sabbath the priest shall
wave it.

23:12 And ye shall offer that day when ye wave the sheaf an he lamb
without blemish of the first year for a burnt offering unto the LORD.

23:13 And the meat offering thereof shall be two tenth deals of fine
flour mingled with oil, an offering made by fire unto the LORD for a
sweet savour: and the drink offering thereof shall be of wine, the
fourth part of an hin.

23:14 And ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor green
ears, until the selfsame day that ye have brought an offering unto
your God: it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations
in all your dwellings.

23:15 And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the sabbath,
from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave offering; seven
sabbaths shall be complete: 23:16 Even unto the morrow after the
seventh sabbath shall ye number fifty days; and ye shall offer a new
meat offering unto the LORD.

23:17 Ye shall bring out of your habitations two wave loaves of two
tenth deals; they shall be of fine flour; they shall be baken with
leaven; they are the firstfruits unto the LORD.

23:18 And ye shall offer with the bread seven lambs without blemish of
the first year, and one young bullock, and two rams: they shall be for
a burnt offering unto the LORD, with their meat offering, and their
drink offerings, even an offering made by fire, of sweet savour unto
the LORD.

23:19 Then ye shall sacrifice one kid of the goats for a sin offering,
and two lambs of the first year for a sacrifice of peace offerings.

23:20 And the priest shall wave them with the bread of the firstfruits
for a wave offering before the LORD, with the two lambs: they shall be
holy to the LORD for the priest.

23:21 And ye shall proclaim on the selfsame day, that it may be an
holy convocation unto you: ye shall do no servile work therein: it
shall be a statute for ever in all your dwellings throughout your
generations.

23:22 And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not make
clean riddance of the corners of thy field when thou reapest, neither
shalt thou gather any gleaning of thy harvest: thou shalt leave them
unto the poor, and to the stranger: I am the LORD your God.

23:23 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 23:24 Speak unto the
children of Israel, saying, In the seventh month, in the first day of
the month, shall ye have a sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets,
an holy convocation.

23:25 Ye shall do no servile work therein: but ye shall offer an
offering made by fire unto the LORD.

23:26 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 23:27 Also on the tenth
day of this seventh month there shall be a day of atonement: it shall
be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall afflict your souls, and
offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD.

23:28 And ye shall do no work in that same day: for it is a day of
atonement, to make an atonement for you before the LORD your God.

23:29 For whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that
same day, he shall be cut off from among his people.

23:30 And whatsoever soul it be that doeth any work in that same day,
the same soul will I destroy from among his people.

23:31 Ye shall do no manner of work: it shall be a statute for ever
throughout your generations in all your dwellings.

23:32 It shall be unto you a sabbath of rest, and ye shall afflict
your souls: in the ninth day of the month at even, from even unto
even, shall ye celebrate your sabbath.

23:33 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 23:34 Speak unto the
children of Israel, saying, The fifteenth day of this seventh month
shall be the feast of tabernacles for seven days unto the LORD.

23:35 On the first day shall be an holy convocation: ye shall do no
servile work therein.

23:36 Seven days ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the
LORD: on the eighth day shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye
shall offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD: it is a solemn
assembly; and ye shall do no servile work therein.

23:37 These are the feasts of the LORD, which ye shall proclaim to be
holy convocations, to offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD, a
burnt offering, and a meat offering, a sacrifice, and drink offerings,
every thing upon his day: 23:38 Beside the sabbaths of the LORD, and
beside your gifts, and beside all your vows, and beside all your
freewill offerings, which ye give unto the LORD.

23:39 Also in the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have
gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall keep a feast unto the LORD
seven days: on the first day shall be a sabbath, and on the eighth day
shall be a sabbath.

23:40 And ye shall take you on the first day the boughs of goodly
trees, branches of palm trees, and the boughs of thick trees, and
willows of the brook; and ye shall rejoice before the LORD your God
seven days.

23:41 And ye shall keep it a feast unto the LORD seven days in the
year.

It shall be a statute for ever in your generations: ye shall celebrate
it in the seventh month.

23:42 Ye shall dwell in booths seven days; all that are Israelites
born shall dwell in booths: 23:43 That your generations may know that
I made the children of Israel to dwell in booths, when I brought them
out of the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.

23:44 And Moses declared unto the children of Israel the feasts of the
LORD.

24:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 24:2 Command the children
of Israel, that they bring unto thee pure oil olive beaten for the
light, to cause the lamps to burn continually.

24:3 Without the vail of the testimony, in the tabernacle of the
congregation, shall Aaron order it from the evening unto the morning
before the LORD continually: it shall be a statute for ever in your
generations.

24:4 He shall order the lamps upon the pure candlestick before the
LORD continually.

24:5 And thou shalt take fine flour, and bake twelve cakes thereof:
two tenth deals shall be in one cake.

24:6 And thou shalt set them in two rows, six on a row, upon the pure
table before the LORD.

24:7 And thou shalt put pure frankincense upon each row, that it may
be on the bread for a memorial, even an offering made by fire unto the
LORD.

24:8 Every sabbath he shall set it in order before the LORD
continually, being taken from the children of Israel by an everlasting
covenant.

24:9 And it shall be Aaron's and his sons'; and they shall eat it in
the holy place: for it is most holy unto him of the offerings of the
LORD made by fire by a perpetual statute.

24:10 And the son of an Israelitish woman, whose father was an
Egyptian, went out among the children of Israel: and this son of the
Israelitish woman and a man of Israel strove together in the camp;
24:11 And the Israelitish woman's son blasphemed the name of the Lord,
and cursed. And they brought him unto Moses: (and his mother's name
was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan:) 24:12 And
they put him in ward, that the mind of the LORD might be shewed them.

24:13 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 24:14 Bring forth him
that hath cursed without the camp; and let all that heard him lay
their hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him.

24:15 And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying,
Whosoever curseth his God shall bear his sin.

24:16 And he that blasphemeth the name of the LORD, he shall surely be
put to death, and all the congregation shall certainly stone him: as
well the stranger, as he that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth
the name of the Lord, shall be put to death.

24:17 And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death.

24:18 And he that killeth a beast shall make it good; beast for beast.

24:19 And if a man cause a blemish in his neighbour; as he hath done,
so shall it be done to him; 24:20 Breach for breach, eye for eye,
tooth for tooth: as he hath caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be
done to him again.

24:21 And he that killeth a beast, he shall restore it: and he that
killeth a man, he shall be put to death.

24:22 Ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as
for one of your own country: for I am the LORD your God.

24:23 And Moses spake to the children of Israel, that they should
bring forth him that had cursed out of the camp, and stone him with
stones. And the children of Israel did as the LORD commanded Moses.

25:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses in mount Sinai, saying, 25:2 Speak
unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the
land which I give you, then shall the land keep a sabbath unto the
LORD.

25:3 Six years thou shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt
prune thy vineyard, and gather in the fruit thereof; 25:4 But in the
seventh year shall be a sabbath of rest unto the land, a sabbath for
the LORD: thou shalt neither sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard.

25:5 That which groweth of its own accord of thy harvest thou shalt
not reap, neither gather the grapes of thy vine undressed: for it is a
year of rest unto the land.

25:6 And the sabbath of the land shall be meat for you; for thee, and
for thy servant, and for thy maid, and for thy hired servant, and for
thy stranger that sojourneth with thee.

25:7 And for thy cattle, and for the beast that are in thy land, shall
all the increase thereof be meat.

25:8 And thou shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, seven
times seven years; and the space of the seven sabbaths of years shall
be unto thee forty and nine years.

25:9 Then shalt thou cause the trumpet of the jubile to sound on the
tenth day of the seventh month, in the day of atonement shall ye make
the trumpet sound throughout all your land.

25:10 And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty
throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants thereof: it shall be
a jubile unto you; and ye shall return every man unto his possession,
and ye shall return every man unto his family.

25:11 A jubile shall that fiftieth year be unto you: ye shall not sow,
neither reap that which groweth of itself in it, nor gather the grapes
in it of thy vine undressed.

25:12 For it is the jubile; it shall be holy unto you: ye shall eat
the increase thereof out of the field.

25:13 In the year of this jubile ye shall return every man unto his
possession.

25:14 And if thou sell ought unto thy neighbour, or buyest ought of
thy neighbour's hand, ye shall not oppress one another: 25:15
According to the number of years after the jubile thou shalt buy of
thy neighbour, and according unto the number of years of the fruits he
shall sell unto thee: 25:16 According to the multitude of years thou
shalt increase the price thereof, and according to the fewness of
years thou shalt diminish the price of it: for according to the number
of the years of the fruits doth he sell unto thee.

25:17 Ye shall not therefore oppress one another; but thou shalt fear
thy God:for I am the LORD your God.

25:18 Wherefore ye shall do my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do
them; and ye shall dwell in the land in safety.

25:19 And the land shall yield her fruit, and ye shall eat your fill,
and dwell therein in safety.

25:20 And if ye shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year? behold,
we shall not sow, nor gather in our increase: 25:21 Then I will
command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring
forth fruit for three years.

25:22 And ye shall sow the eighth year, and eat yet of old fruit until
the ninth year; until her fruits come in ye shall eat of the old
store.

25:23 The land shall not be sold for ever: for the land is mine, for
ye are strangers and sojourners with me.

25:24 And in all the land of your possession ye shall grant a
redemption for the land.

25:25 If thy brother be waxen poor, and hath sold away some of his
possession, and if any of his kin come to redeem it, then shall he
redeem that which his brother sold.

25:26 And if the man have none to redeem it, and himself be able to
redeem it; 25:27 Then let him count the years of the sale thereof, and
restore the overplus unto the man to whom he sold it; that he may
return unto his possession.

25:28 But if he be not able to restore it to him, then that which is
sold shall remain in the hand of him that hath bought it until the
year of jubile: and in the jubile it shall go out, and he shall return
unto his possession.

25:29 And if a man sell a dwelling house in a walled city, then he may
redeem it within a whole year after it is sold; within a full year may
he redeem it.

25:30 And if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, then
the house that is in the walled city shall be established for ever to
him that bought it throughout his generations: it shall not go out in
the jubile.

25:31 But the houses of the villages which have no wall round about
them shall be counted as the fields of the country: they may be
redeemed, and they shall go out in the jubile.

25:32 Notwithstanding the cities of the Levites, and the houses of the
cities of their possession, may the Levites redeem at any time.

25:33 And if a man purchase of the Levites, then the house that was
sold, and the city of his possession, shall go out in the year of
jubile: for the houses of the cities of the Levites are their
possession among the children of Israel.

25:34 But the field of the suburbs of their cities may not be sold;
for it is their perpetual possession.

25:35 And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee;
then thou shalt relieve him: yea, though he be a stranger, or a
sojourner; that he may live with thee.

25:36 Take thou no usury of him, or increase: but fear thy God; that
thy brother may live with thee.

25:37 Thou shalt not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy
victuals for increase.

25:38 I am the LORD your God, which brought you forth out of the land
of Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan, and to be your God.

25:39 And if thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poor, and be
sold unto thee; thou shalt not compel him to serve as a bondservant:
25:40 But as an hired servant, and as a sojourner, he shall be with
thee, and shall serve thee unto the year of jubile.

25:41 And then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children
with him, and shall return unto his own family, and unto the
possession of his fathers shall he return.

25:42 For they are my servants, which I brought forth out of the land
of Egypt: they shall not be sold as bondmen.

25:43 Thou shalt not rule over him with rigour; but shalt fear thy
God.

25:44 Both thy bondmen, and thy bondmaids, which thou shalt have,
shall be of the heathen that are round about you; of them shall ye buy
bondmen and bondmaids.

25:45 Moreover of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among
you, of them shall ye buy, and of their families that are with you,
which they begat in your land: and they shall be your possession.

25:46 And ye shall take them as an inheritance for your children after
you, to inherit them for a possession; they shall be your bondmen for
ever: but over your brethren the children of Israel, ye shall not rule
one over another with rigour.

25:47 And if a sojourner or stranger wax rich by thee, and thy brother
that dwelleth by him wax poor, and sell himself unto the stranger or
sojourner by thee, or to the stock of the stranger's family: 25:48
After that he is sold he may be redeemed again; one of his brethren
may redeem him: 25:49 Either his uncle, or his uncle's son, may redeem
him, or any that is nigh of kin unto him of his family may redeem him;
or if he be able, he may redeem himself.

25:50 And he shall reckon with him that bought him from the year that
he was sold to him unto the year of jubile: and the price of his sale
shall be according unto the number of years, according to the time of
an hired servant shall it be with him.

25:51 If there be yet many years behind, according unto them he shall
give again the price of his redemption out of the money that he was
bought for.

25:52 And if there remain but few years unto the year of jubile, then
he shall count with him, and according unto his years shall he give
him again the price of his redemption.

25:53 And as a yearly hired servant shall he be with him: and the
other shall not rule with rigour over him in thy sight.

25:54 And if he be not redeemed in these years, then he shall go out
in the year of jubile, both he, and his children with him.

25:55 For unto me the children of Israel are servants; they are my
servants whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt: I am the LORD
your God.

26:1 Ye shall make you no idols nor graven image, neither rear you up
a standing image, neither shall ye set up any image of stone in your
land, to bow down unto it: for I am the LORD your God.

26:2 Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I am the
LORD.

26:3 If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them;
26:4 Then I will give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield
her increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit.

26:5 And your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage
shall reach unto the sowing time: and ye shall eat your bread to the
full, and dwell in your land safely.

26:6 And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and
none shall make you afraid: and I will rid evil beasts out of the
land, neither shall the sword go through your land.

26:7 And ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you
by the sword.

26:8 And five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you
shall put ten thousand to flight: and your enemies shall fall before
you by the sword.

26:9 For I will have respect unto you, and make you fruitful, and
multiply you, and establish my covenant with you.

26:10 And ye shall eat old store, and bring forth the old because of
the new.

26:11 And I set my tabernacle among you: and my soul shall not abhor
you.

26:12 And I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be
my people.

26:13 I am the LORD your God, which brought you forth out of the land
of Egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen; and I have broken the
bands of your yoke, and made you go upright.

26:14 But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these
commandments; 26:15 And if ye shall despise my statutes, or if your
soul abhor my judgments, so that ye will not do all my commandments,
but that ye break my covenant: 26:16 I also will do this unto you; I
will even appoint over you terror, consumption, and the burning ague,
that shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart: and ye shall
sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it.

26:17 And I will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain before
your enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you; and ye shall
flee when none pursueth you.

26:18 And if ye will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then I will
punish you seven times more for your sins.

26:19 And I will break the pride of your power; and I will make your
heaven as iron, and your earth as brass: 26:20 And your strength shall
be spent in vain: for your land shall not yield her increase, neither
shall the trees of the land yield their fruits.

26:21 And if ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me; I
will bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins.

26:22 I will also send wild beasts among you, which shall rob you of
your children, and destroy your cattle, and make you few in number;
and your high ways shall be desolate.

26:23 And if ye will not be reformed by me by these things, but will
walk contrary unto me; 26:24 Then will I also walk contrary unto you,
and will punish you yet seven times for your sins.

26:25 And I will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel
of my covenant: and when ye are gathered together within your cities,
I will send the pestilence among you; and ye shall be delivered into
the hand of the enemy.

26:26 And when I have broken the staff of your bread, ten women shall
bake your bread in one oven, and they shall deliver you your bread
again by weight: and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied.

26:27 And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk
contrary unto me; 26:28 Then I will walk contrary unto you also in
fury; and I, even I, will chastise you seven times for your sins.

26:29 And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your
daughters shall ye eat.

26:30 And I will destroy your high places, and cut down your images,
and cast your carcases upon the carcases of your idols, and my soul
shall abhor you.

26:31 And I will make your cities waste, and bring your sanctuaries
unto desolation, and I will not smell the savour of your sweet odours.

26:32 And I will bring the land into desolation: and your enemies
which dwell therein shall be astonished at it.

26:33 And I will scatter you among the heathen, and will draw out a
sword after you: and your land shall be desolate, and your cities
waste.

26:34 Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, as long as it lieth
desolate, and ye be in your enemies' land; even then shall the land
rest, and enjoy her sabbaths.

26:35 As long as it lieth desolate it shall rest; because it did not
rest in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it.

26:36 And upon them that are left alive of you I will send a faintness
into their hearts in the lands of their enemies; and the sound of a
shaken leaf shall chase them; and they shall flee, as fleeing from a
sword; and they shall fall when none pursueth.

26:37 And they shall fall one upon another, as it were before a sword,
when none pursueth: and ye shall have no power to stand before your
enemies.

26:38 And ye shall perish among the heathen, and the land of your
enemies shall eat you up.

26:39 And they that are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity
in your enemies' lands; and also in the iniquities of their fathers
shall they pine away with them.

26:40 If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their
fathers, with their trespass which they trespassed against me, and
that also they have walked contrary unto me; 26:41 And that I also
have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of
their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they
then accept of the punishment of their iniquity: 26:42 Then will I
remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and
also my covenant with Abraham will I remember; and I will remember the
land.

26:43 The land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy her
sabbaths, while she lieth desolate without them: and they shall accept
of the punishment of their iniquity: because, even because they
despised my judgments, and because their soul abhorred my statutes.

26:44 And yet for all that, when they be in the land of their enemies,
I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them
utterly, and to break my covenant with them: for I am the LORD their
God.

26:45 But I will for their sakes remember the covenant of their
ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in the sight
of the heathen, that I might be their God: I am the LORD.

26:46 These are the statutes and judgments and laws, which the LORD
made between him and the children of Israel in mount Sinai by the hand
of Moses.

27:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 27:2 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and say unto them, When a man shall make a
singular vow, the persons shall be for the LORD by thy estimation.

27:3 And thy estimation shall be of the male from twenty years old
even unto sixty years old, even thy estimation shall be fifty shekels
of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary.

27:4 And if it be a female, then thy estimation shall be thirty
shekels.

27:5 And if it be from five years old even unto twenty years old, then
thy estimation shall be of the male twenty shekels, and for the female
ten shekels.

27:6 And if it be from a month old even unto five years old, then thy
estimation shall be of the male five shekels of silver, and for the
female thy estimation shall be three shekels of silver.

27:7 And if it be from sixty years old and above; if it be a male,
then thy estimation shall be fifteen shekels, and for the female ten
shekels.

27:8 But if he be poorer than thy estimation, then he shall present
himself before the priest, and the priest shall value him; according
to his ability that vowed shall the priest value him.

27:9 And if it be a beast, whereof men bring an offering unto the
LORD, all that any man giveth of such unto the LORD shall be holy.

27:10 He shall not alter it, nor change it, a good for a bad, or a bad
for a good: and if he shall at all change beast for beast, then it and
the exchange thereof shall be holy.

27:11 And if it be any unclean beast, of which they do not offer a
sacrifice unto the LORD, then he shall present the beast before the
priest: 27:12 And the priest shall value it, whether it be good or
bad: as thou valuest it, who art the priest, so shall it be.

27:13 But if he will at all redeem it, then he shall add a fifth part
thereof unto thy estimation.

27:14 And when a man shall sanctify his house to be holy unto the
LORD, then the priest shall estimate it, whether it be good or bad: as
the priest shall estimate it, so shall it stand.

27:15 And if he that sanctified it will redeem his house, then he
shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto it, and
it shall be his.

27:16 And if a man shall sanctify unto the LORD some part of a field
of his possession, then thy estimation shall be according to the seed
thereof: an homer of barley seed shall be valued at fifty shekels of
silver.

27:17 If he sanctify his field from the year of jubile, according to
thy estimation it shall stand.

27:18 But if he sanctify his field after the jubile, then the priest
shall reckon unto him the money according to the years that remain,
even unto the year of the jubile, and it shall be abated from thy
estimation.

27:19 And if he that sanctified the field will in any wise redeem it,
then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto
it, and it shall be assured to him.

27:20 And if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold the
field to another man, it shall not be redeemed any more.

27:21 But the field, when it goeth out in the jubile, shall be holy
unto the LORD, as a field devoted; the possession thereof shall be the
priest's.

27:22 And if a man sanctify unto the LORD a field which he hath
bought, which is not of the fields of his possession; 27:23 Then the
priest shall reckon unto him the worth of thy estimation, even unto
the year of the jubile: and he shall give thine estimation in that
day, as a holy thing unto the LORD.

27:24 In the year of the jubile the field shall return unto him of
whom it was bought, even to him to whom the possession of the land did
belong.

27:25 And all thy estimations shall be according to the shekel of the
sanctuary: twenty gerahs shall be the shekel.

27:26 Only the firstling of the beasts, which should be the LORD's
firstling, no man shall sanctify it; whether it be ox, or sheep: it is
the LORD's.

27:27 And if it be of an unclean beast, then he shall redeem it
according to thine estimation, and shall add a fifth part of it
thereto: or if it be not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to
thy estimation.

27:28 Notwithstanding no devoted thing, that a man shall devote unto
the LORD of all that he hath, both of man and beast, and of the field
of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed: every devoted thing is
most holy unto the LORD.

27:29 None devoted, which shall be devoted of men, shall be redeemed;
but shall surely be put to death.

27:30 And all the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land,
or of the fruit of the tree, is the LORD's: it is holy unto the LORD.

27:31 And if a man will at all redeem ought of his tithes, he shall
add thereto the fifth part thereof.

27:32 And concerning the tithe of the herd, or of the flock, even of
whatsoever passeth under the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the
LORD.

27:33 He shall not search whether it be good or bad, neither shall he
change it: and if he change it at all, then both it and the change
thereof shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed.

27:34 These are the commandments, which the LORD commanded Moses for
the children of Israel in mount Sinai.




The Fourth Book of Moses:  Called Numbers


1:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the
tabernacle of the congregation, on the first day of the second month,
in the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt,
saying, 1:2 Take ye the sum of all the congregation of the children of
Israel, after their families, by the house of their fathers, with the
number of their names, every male by their polls; 1:3 From twenty
years old and upward, all that are able to go forth to war in Israel:
thou and Aaron shall number them by their armies.

1:4 And with you there shall be a man of every tribe; every one head
of the house of his fathers.

1:5 And these are the names of the men that shall stand with you: of
the tribe of Reuben; Elizur the son of Shedeur.

1:6 Of Simeon; Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.

1:7 Of Judah; Nahshon the son of Amminadab.

1:8 Of Issachar; Nethaneel the son of Zuar.

1:9 Of Zebulun; Eliab the son of Helon.

1:10 Of the children of Joseph: of Ephraim; Elishama the son of
Ammihud: of Manasseh; Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

1:11 Of Benjamin; Abidan the son of Gideoni.

1:12 Of Dan; Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.

1:13 Of Asher; Pagiel the son of Ocran.

1:14 Of Gad; Eliasaph the son of Deuel.

1:15 Of Naphtali; Ahira the son of Enan.

1:16 These were the renowned of the congregation, princes of the
tribes of their fathers, heads of thousands in Israel.

1:17 And Moses and Aaron took these men which are expressed by their
names: 1:18 And they assembled all the congregation together on the
first day of the second month, and they declared their pedigrees after
their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number
of the names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls.

1:19 As the LORD commanded Moses, so he numbered them in the
wilderness of Sinai.

1:20 And the children of Reuben, Israel's eldest son, by their
generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers,
according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male from
twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
1:21 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Reuben,
were forty and six thousand and five hundred.

1:22 Of the children of Simeon, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, those that were numbered of
them, according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male
from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to
war; 1:23 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of
Simeon, were fifty and nine thousand and three hundred.

1:24 Of the children of Gad, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:25 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Gad, were forty and five thousand six hundred and fifty.

1:26 Of the children of Judah, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:27 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Judah, were threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.

1:28 Of the children of Issachar, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:29 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Issachar, were fifty and four thousand and four hundred.

1:30 Of the children of Zebulun, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:31 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Zebulun, were fifty and seven thousand and four hundred.

1:32 Of the children of Joseph, namely, of the children of Ephraim, by
their generations, after their families, by the house of their
fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old
and upward, all that were able to go forth to war; 1:33 Those that
were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Ephraim, were forty
thousand and five hundred.

1:34 Of the children of Manasseh, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:35 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Manasseh, were thirty and two thousand and two hundred.

1:36 Of the children of Benjamin, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:37 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Benjamin, were thirty and five thousand and four hundred.

1:38 Of the children of Dan, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:39 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Dan, were threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.

1:40 Of the children of Asher, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:41 Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of Asher, were forty and one thousand and five hundred.

1:42 Of the children of Naphtali, throughout their generations, after
their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number
of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to
go forth to war; 1:43 Those that were numbered of them, even of the
tribe of Naphtali, were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.

1:44 These are those that were numbered, which Moses and Aaron
numbered, and the princes of Israel, being twelve men: each one was
for the house of his fathers.

1:45 So were all those that were numbered of the children of Israel,
by the house of their fathers, from twenty years old and upward, all
that were able to go forth to war in Israel; 1:46 Even all they that
were numbered were six hundred thousand and three thousand and five
hundred and fifty.

1:47 But the Levites after the tribe of their fathers were not
numbered among them.

1:48 For the LORD had spoken unto Moses, saying, 1:49 Only thou shalt
not number the tribe of Levi, neither take the sum of them among the
children of Israel: 1:50 But thou shalt appoint the Levites over the
tabernacle of testimony, and over all the vessels thereof, and over
all things that belong to it: they shall bear the tabernacle, and all
the vessels thereof; and they shall minister unto it, and shall encamp
round about the tabernacle.

1:51 And when the tabernacle setteth forward, the Levites shall take
it down: and when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levites shall
set it up: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

1:52 And the children of Israel shall pitch their tents, every man by
his own camp, and every man by his own standard, throughout their
hosts.

1:53 But the Levites shall pitch round about the tabernacle of
testimony, that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the
children of Israel: and the Levites shall keep the charge of the
tabernacle of testimony.

1:54 And the children of Israel did according to all that the LORD
commanded Moses, so did they.

2:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 2:2 Every
man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard, with
the ensign of their father's house: far off about the tabernacle of
the congregation shall they pitch.

2:3 And on the east side toward the rising of the sun shall they of
the standard of the camp of Judah pitch throughout their armies: and
Nahshon the son of Amminadab shall be captain of the children of
Judah.

2:4 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were
threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.

2:5 And those that do pitch next unto him shall be the tribe of
Issachar: and Nethaneel the son of Zuar shall be captain of the
children of Issachar.

2:6 And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and
four thousand and four hundred.

2:7 Then the tribe of Zebulun: and Eliab the son of Helon shall be
captain of the children of Zebulun.

2:8 And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and
seven thousand and four hundred.

2:9 All that were numbered in the camp of Judah were an hundred
thousand and fourscore thousand and six thousand and four hundred,
throughout their armies. These shall first set forth.

2:10 On the south side shall be the standard of the camp of Reuben
according to their armies: and the captain of the children of Reuben
shall be Elizur the son of Shedeur.

2:11 And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were forty
and six thousand and five hundred.

2:12 And those which pitch by him shall be the tribe of Simeon: and
the captain of the children of Simeon shall be Shelumiel the son of
Zurishaddai.

2:13 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty
and nine thousand and three hundred.

2:14 Then the tribe of Gad: and the captain of the sons of Gad shall
be Eliasaph the son of Reuel.

2:15 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty
and five thousand and six hundred and fifty.

2:16 All that were numbered in the camp of Reuben were an hundred
thousand and fifty and one thousand and four hundred and fifty,
throughout their armies. And they shall set forth in the second rank.

2:17 Then the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with
the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camp: as they encamp, so
shall they set forward, every man in his place by their standards.

2:18 On the west side shall be the standard of the camp of Ephraim
according to their armies: and the captain of the sons of Ephraim
shall be Elishama the son of Ammihud.

2:19 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty
thousand and five hundred.

2:20 And by him shall be the tribe of Manasseh: and the captain of the
children of Manasseh shall be Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

2:21 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty
and two thousand and two hundred.

2:22 Then the tribe of Benjamin: and the captain of the sons of
Benjamin shall be Abidan the son of Gideoni.

2:23 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty
and five thousand and four hundred.

2:24 All that were numbered of the camp of Ephraim were an hundred
thousand and eight thousand and an hundred, throughout their armies.
And they shall go forward in the third rank.

2:25 The standard of the camp of Dan shall be on the north side by
their armies: and the captain of the children of Dan shall be Ahiezer
the son of Ammishaddai.

2:26 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were
threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.

2:27 And those that encamp by him shall be the tribe of Asher: and the
captain of the children of Asher shall be Pagiel the son of Ocran.

2:28 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty
and one thousand and five hundred.

2:29 Then the tribe of Naphtali: and the captain of the children of
Naphtali shall be Ahira the son of Enan.

2:30 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty
and three thousand and four hundred.

2:31 All they that were numbered in the camp of Dan were an hundred
thousand and fifty and seven thousand and six hundred. They shall go
hindmost with their standards.

2:32 These are those which were numbered of the children of Israel by
the house of their fathers: all those that were numbered of the camps
throughout their hosts were six hundred thousand and three thousand
and five hundred and fifty.

2:33 But the Levites were not numbered among the children of Israel;
as the LORD commanded Moses.

2:34 And the children of Israel did according to all that the LORD
commanded Moses: so they pitched by their standards, and so they set
forward, every one after their families, according to the house of
their fathers.

3:1 These also are the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day that
the LORD spake with Moses in mount Sinai.

3:2 And these are the names of the sons of Aaron; Nadab the firstborn,
and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

3:3 These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the priests which were
anointed, whom he consecrated to minister in the priest's office.
