upon it.

11:10 Then Moses heard the people weep throughout their families,
every man in the door of his tent: and the anger of the LORD was
kindled greatly; Moses also was displeased.

11:11 And Moses said unto the LORD, Wherefore hast thou afflicted thy
servant? and wherefore have I not found favour in thy sight, that thou
layest the burden of all this people upon me?  11:12 Have I conceived
all this people? have I begotten them, that thou shouldest say unto
me, Carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing father beareth the sucking
child, unto the land which thou swarest unto their fathers?  11:13
Whence should I have flesh to give unto all this people? for they weep
unto me, saying, Give us flesh, that we may eat.

11:14 I am not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too
heavy for me.

11:15 And if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of
hand, if I have found favour in thy sight; and let me not see my
wretchedness.

11:16 And the LORD said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the
elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people,
and officers over them; and bring them unto the tabernacle of the
congregation, that they may stand there with thee.

11:17 And I will come down and talk with thee there: and I will take
of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they
shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not
thyself alone.

11:18 And say thou unto the people, Sanctify yourselves against to
morrow, and ye shall eat flesh: for ye have wept in the ears of the
LORD, saying, Who shall give us flesh to eat? for it was well with us
in Egypt: therefore the LORD will give you flesh, and ye shall eat.

11:19 Ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither
ten days, nor twenty days; 11:20 But even a whole month, until it come
out at your nostrils, and it be loathsome unto you: because that ye
have despised the LORD which is among you, and have wept before him,
saying, Why came we forth out of Egypt?  11:21 And Moses said, The
people, among whom I am, are six hundred thousand footmen; and thou
hast said, I will give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month.

11:22 Shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them, to suffice
them?  or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them,
to suffice them?  11:23 And the LORD said unto Moses, Is the LORD's
hand waxed short? thou shalt see now whether my word shall come to
pass unto thee or not.

11:24 And Moses went out, and told the people the words of the LORD,
and gathered the seventy men of the elders of the people, and set them
round about the tabernacle.

11:25 And the LORD came down in a cloud, and spake unto him, and took
of the spirit that was upon him, and gave it unto the seventy elders:
and it came to pass, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they
prophesied, and did not cease.

11:26 But there remained two of the men in the camp, the name of the
one was Eldad, and the name of the other Medad: and the spirit rested
upon them; and they were of them that were written, but went not out
unto the tabernacle: and they prophesied in the camp.

11:27 And there ran a young man, and told Moses, and said, Eldad and
Medad do prophesy in the camp.

11:28 And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Moses, one of his
young men, answered and said, My lord Moses, forbid them.

11:29 And Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? would God
that all the LORD's people were prophets, and that the LORD would put
his spirit upon them!  11:30 And Moses gat him into the camp, he and
the elders of Israel.

11:31 And there went forth a wind from the LORD, and brought quails
from the sea, and let them fall by the camp, as it were a day's
journey on this side, and as it were a day's journey on the other
side, round about the camp, and as it were two cubits high upon the
face of the earth.

11:32 And the people stood up all that day, and all that night, and
all the next day, and they gathered the quails: he that gathered least
gathered ten homers: and they spread them all abroad for themselves
round about the camp.

11:33 And while the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was
chewed, the wrath of the LORD was kindled against the people, and the
LORD smote the people with a very great plague.

11:34 And he called the name of that place Kibrothhattaavah: because
there they buried the people that lusted.

11:35 And the people journeyed from Kibrothhattaavah unto Hazeroth;
and abode at Hazeroth.

12:1 And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses because of the Ethiopian
woman whom he had married: for he had married an Ethiopian woman.

12:2 And they said, Hath the LORD indeed spoken only by Moses? hath he
not spoken also by us? And the LORD heard it.

12:3 (Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were
upon the face of the earth.)  12:4 And the LORD spake suddenly unto
Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto Miriam, Come out ye three unto the
tabernacle of the congregation. And they three came out.

12:5 And the LORD came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood in
the door of the tabernacle, and called Aaron and Miriam: and they both
came forth.

12:6 And he said, Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you,
I the LORD will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak
unto him in a dream.

12:7 My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house.

12:8 With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in
dark speeches; and the similitude of the LORD shall he behold:
wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?
12:9 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against them; and he
departed.

12:10 And the cloud departed from off the tabernacle; and, behold,
Miriam became leprous, white as snow: and Aaron looked upon Miriam,
and, behold, she was leprous.

12:11 And Aaron said unto Moses, Alas, my lord, I beseech thee, lay
not the sin upon us, wherein we have done foolishly, and wherein we
have sinned.

12:12 Let her not be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed
when he cometh out of his mother's womb.

12:13 And Moses cried unto the LORD, saying, Heal her now, O God, I
beseech thee.

12:14 And the LORD said unto Moses, If her father had but spit in her
face, should she not be ashamed seven days? let her be shut out from
the camp seven days, and after that let her be received in again.

12:15 And Miriam was shut out from the camp seven days: and the people
journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again.

12:16 And afterward the people removed from Hazeroth, and pitched in
the wilderness of Paran.

13:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 13:2 Send thou men, that
they may search the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children of
Israel: of every tribe of their fathers shall ye send a man, every one
a ruler among them.

13:3 And Moses by the commandment of the LORD sent them from the
wilderness of Paran: all those men were heads of the children of
Israel.

13:4 And these were their names: of the tribe of Reuben, Shammua the
son of Zaccur.

13:5 Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son of Hori.

13:6 Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.

13:7 Of the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of Joseph.

13:8 Of the tribe of Ephraim, Oshea the son of Nun.

13:9 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu.

13:10 Of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the son of Sodi.

13:11 Of the tribe of Joseph, namely, of the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi
the son of Susi.

13:12 Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli.

13:13 Of the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of Michael.

13:14 Of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi.

13:15 Of the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi.

13:16 These are the names of the men which Moses sent to spy out the
land.

And Moses called Oshea the son of Nun Jehoshua.

13:17 And Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan, and said unto
them, Get you up this way southward, and go up into the mountain:
13:18 And see the land, what it is, and the people that dwelleth
therein, whether they be strong or weak, few or many; 13:19 And what
the land is that they dwell in, whether it be good or bad; and what
cities they be that they dwell in, whether in tents, or in strong
holds; 13:20 And what the land is, whether it be fat or lean, whether
there be wood therein, or not. And be ye of good courage, and bring of
the fruit of the land. Now the time was the time of the firstripe
grapes.

13:21 So they went up, and searched the land from the wilderness of
Zin unto Rehob, as men come to Hamath.

13:22 And they ascended by the south, and came unto Hebron; where
Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the children of Anak, were. (Now Hebron
was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.)  13:23 And they came unto
the brook of Eshcol, and cut down from thence a branch with one
cluster of grapes, and they bare it between two upon a staff; and they
brought of the pomegranates, and of the figs.

13:24 The place was called the brook Eshcol, because of the cluster of
grapes which the children of Israel cut down from thence.

13:25 And they returned from searching of the land after forty days.

13:26 And they went and came to Moses, and to Aaron, and to all the
congregation of the children of Israel, unto the wilderness of Paran,
to Kadesh; and brought back word unto them, and unto all the
congregation, and shewed them the fruit of the land.

13:27 And they told him, and said, We came unto the land whither thou
sentest us, and surely it floweth with milk and honey; and this is the
fruit of it.

13:28 Nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the land, and
the cities are walled, and very great: and moreover we saw the
children of Anak there.

13:29 The Amalekites dwell in the land of the south: and the Hittites,
and the Jebusites, and the Amorites, dwell in the mountains: and the
Canaanites dwell by the sea, and by the coast of Jordan.

13:30 And Caleb stilled the people before Moses, and said, Let us go
up at once, and possess it; for we are well able to overcome it.

13:31 But the men that went up with him said, We be not able to go up
against the people; for they are stronger than we.

13:32 And they brought up an evil report of the land which they had
searched unto the children of Israel, saying, The land, through which
we have gone to search it, is a land that eateth up the inhabitants
thereof; and all the people that we saw in it are men of a great
stature.

13:33 And there we saw the giants, the sons of Anak, which come of the
giants: and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were
in their sight.

14:1 And all the congregation lifted up their voice, and cried; and
the people wept that night.

14:2 And all the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against
Aaron: and the whole congregation said unto them, Would God that we
had died in the land of Egypt! or would God we had died in this
wilderness!  14:3 And wherefore hath the LORD brought us unto this
land, to fall by the sword, that our wives and our children should be
a prey? were it not better for us to return into Egypt?  14:4 And they
said one to another, Let us make a captain, and let us return into
Egypt.

14:5 Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly
of the congregation of the children of Israel.

14:6 And Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, which
were of them that searched the land, rent their clothes: 14:7 And they
spake unto all the company of the children of Israel, saying, The
land, which we passed through to search it, is an exceeding good land.

14:8 If the LORD delight in us, then he will bring us into this land,
and give it us; a land which floweth with milk and honey.

14:9 Only rebel not ye against the LORD, neither fear ye the people of
the land; for they are bread for us: their defence is departed from
them, and the LORD is with us: fear them not.

14:10 But all the congregation bade stone them with stones. And the
glory of the LORD appeared in the tabernacle of the congregation
before all the children of Israel.

14:11 And the LORD said unto Moses, How long will this people provoke
me?  and how long will it be ere they believe me, for all the signs
which I have shewed among them?  14:12 I will smite them with the
pestilence, and disinherit them, and will make of thee a greater
nation and mightier than they.

14:13 And Moses said unto the LORD, Then the Egyptians shall hear it,
(for thou broughtest up this people in thy might from among them;)
14:14 And they will tell it to the inhabitants of this land: for they
have heard that thou LORD art among this people, that thou LORD art
seen face to face, and that thy cloud standeth over them, and that
thou goest before them, by day time in a pillar of a cloud, and in a
pillar of fire by night.

14:15 Now if thou shalt kill all this people as one man, then the
nations which have heard the fame of thee will speak, saying, 14:16
Because the LORD was not able to bring this people into the land which
he sware unto them, therefore he hath slain them in the wilderness.

14:17 And now, I beseech thee, let the power of my LORD be great,
according as thou hast spoken, saying, 14:18 The LORD is
longsuffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and
transgression, and by no means clearing the guilty, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation.

14:19 Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people according
unto the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou hast forgiven this
people, from Egypt even until now.

14:20 And the LORD said, I have pardoned according to thy word: 14:21
But as truly as I live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory
of the LORD.

14:22 Because all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles,
which I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now
these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice; 14:23 Surely they
shall not see the land which I sware unto their fathers, neither shall
any of them that provoked me see it: 14:24 But my servant Caleb,
because he had another spirit with him, and hath followed me fully,
him will I bring into the land whereinto he went; and his seed shall
possess it.

14:25 (Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites dwelt in the valley.)
Tomorrow turn you, and get you into the wilderness by the way of the
Red sea.

14:26 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 14:27 How
long shall I bear with this evil congregation, which murmur against
me? I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel, which they
murmur against me.

14:28 Say unto them, As truly as I live, saith the LORD, as ye have
spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you: 14:29 Your carcases shall
fall in this wilderness; and all that were numbered of you, according
to your whole number, from twenty years old and upward which have
murmured against me.

14:30 Doubtless ye shall not come into the land, concerning which I
sware to make you dwell therein, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and
Joshua the son of Nun.

14:31 But your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, them will
I bring in, and they shall know the land which ye have despised.

14:32 But as for you, your carcases, they shall fall in this
wilderness.

14:33 And your children shall wander in the wilderness forty years,
and bear your whoredoms, until your carcases be wasted in the
wilderness.

14:34 After the number of the days in which ye searched the land, even
forty days, each day for a year, shall ye bear your iniquities, even
forty years, and ye shall know my breach of promise.

14:35 I the LORD have said, I will surely do it unto all this evil
congregation, that are gathered together against me: in this
wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they shall die.

14:36 And the men, which Moses sent to search the land, who returned,
and made all the congregation to murmur against him, by bringing up a
slander upon the land, 14:37 Even those men that did bring up the evil
report upon the land, died by the plague before the LORD.

14:38 But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, which
were of the men that went to search the land, lived still.

14:39 And Moses told these sayings unto all the children of Israel:
and the people mourned greatly.

14:40 And they rose up early in the morning, and gat them up into the
top of the mountain, saying, Lo, we be here, and will go up unto the
place which the LORD hath promised: for we have sinned.

14:41 And Moses said, Wherefore now do ye transgress the commandment
of the LORD? but it shall not prosper.

14:42 Go not up, for the LORD is not among you; that ye be not smitten
before your enemies.

14:43 For the Amalekites and the Canaanites are there before you, and
ye shall fall by the sword: because ye are turned away from the LORD,
therefore the LORD will not be with you.

14:44 But they presumed to go up unto the hill top: nevertheless the
ark of the covenant of the LORD, and Moses, departed not out of the
camp.

14:45 Then the Amalekites came down, and the Canaanites which dwelt in
that hill, and smote them, and discomfited them, even unto Hormah.

15:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 15:2 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come into the land
of your habitations, which I give unto you, 15:3 And will make an
offering by fire unto the LORD, a burnt offering, or a sacrifice in
performing a vow, or in a freewill offering, or in your solemn feasts,
to make a sweet savour unto the LORD, of the herd or of the flock:
15:4 Then shall he that offereth his offering unto the LORD bring a
meat offering of a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of
an hin of oil.

15:5 And the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering shalt
thou prepare with the burnt offering or sacrifice, for one lamb.

15:6 Or for a ram, thou shalt prepare for a meat offering two tenth
deals of flour mingled with the third part of an hin of oil.

15:7 And for a drink offering thou shalt offer the third part of an
hin of wine, for a sweet savour unto the LORD.

15:8 And when thou preparest a bullock for a burnt offering, or for a
sacrifice in performing a vow, or peace offerings unto the LORD: 15:9
Then shall he bring with a bullock a meat offering of three tenth
deals of flour mingled with half an hin of oil.

15:10 And thou shalt bring for a drink offering half an hin of wine,
for an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.

15:11 Thus shall it be done for one bullock, or for one ram, or for a
lamb, or a kid.

15:12 According to the number that ye shall prepare, so shall ye do to
every one according to their number.

15:13 All that are born of the country shall do these things after
this manner, in offering an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour
unto the LORD.

15:14 And if a stranger sojourn with you, or whosoever be among you in
your generations, and will offer an offering made by fire, of a sweet
savour unto the LORD; as ye do, so he shall do.

15:15 One ordinance shall be both for you of the congregation, and
also for the stranger that sojourneth with you, an ordinance for ever
in your generations: as ye are, so shall the stranger be before the
LORD.

15:16 One law and one manner shall be for you, and for the stranger
that sojourneth with you.

15:17 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 15:18 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land
whither I bring you, 15:19 Then it shall be, that, when ye eat of the
bread of the land, ye shall offer up an heave offering unto the LORD.

15:20 Ye shall offer up a cake of the first of your dough for an heave
offering: as ye do the heave offering of the threshingfloor, so shall
ye heave it.

15:21 Of the first of your dough ye shall give unto the LORD an heave
offering in your generations.

15:22 And if ye have erred, and not observed all these commandments,
which the LORD hath spoken unto Moses, 15:23 Even all that the LORD
hath commanded you by the hand of Moses, from the day that the LORD
commanded Moses, and henceforward among your generations; 15:24 Then
it shall be, if ought be committed by ignorance without the knowledge
of the congregation, that all the congregation shall offer one young
bullock for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour unto the LORD, with
his meat offering, and his drink offering, according to the manner,
and one kid of the goats for a sin offering.

15:25 And the priest shall make an atonement for all the congregation
of the children of Israel, and it shall be forgiven them; for it is
ignorance: and they shall bring their offering, a sacrifice made by
fire unto the LORD, and their sin offering before the LORD, for their
ignorance: 15:26 And it shall be forgiven all the congregation of the
children of Israel, and the stranger that sojourneth among them;
seeing all the people were in ignorance.

15:27 And if any soul sin through ignorance, then he shall bring a she
goat of the first year for a sin offering.

15:28 And the priest shall make an atonement for the soul that sinneth
ignorantly, when he sinneth by ignorance before the LORD, to make an
atonement for him; and it shall be forgiven him.

15:29 Ye shall have one law for him that sinneth through ignorance,
both for him that is born among the children of Israel, and for the
stranger that sojourneth among them.

15:30 But the soul that doeth ought presumptuously, whether he be born
in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the LORD; and that
soul shall be cut off from among his people.

15:31 Because he hath despised the word of the LORD, and hath broken
his commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off; his iniquity
shall be upon him.

15:32 And while the children of Israel were in the wilderness, they
found a man that gathered sticks upon the sabbath day.

15:33 And they that found him gathering sticks brought him unto Moses
and Aaron, and unto all the congregation.

15:34 And they put him in ward, because it was not declared what
should be done to him.

15:35 And the LORD said unto Moses, The man shall be surely put to
death: all the congregation shall stone him with stones without the
camp.

15:36 And all the congregation brought him without the camp, and
stoned him with stones, and he died; as the LORD commanded Moses.

15:37 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 15:38 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and bid them that they make them fringes in the
borders of their garments throughout their generations, and that they
put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue: 15:39 And it
shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember
all the commandments of the LORD, and do them; and that ye seek not
after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a
whoring: 15:40 That ye may remember, and do all my commandments, and
be holy unto your God.

15:41 I am the LORD your God, which brought you out of the land of
Egypt, to be your God: I am the LORD your God.

16:1 Now Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi,
and Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and On, the son of Peleth,
sons of Reuben, took men: 16:2 And they rose up before Moses, with
certain of the children of Israel, two hundred and fifty princes of
the assembly, famous in the congregation, men of renown: 16:3 And they
gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, and said
unto them, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are
holy, every one of them, and the LORD is among them: wherefore then
lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the LORD?  16:4 And
when Moses heard it, he fell upon his face: 16:5 And he spake unto
Korah and unto all his company, saying, Even to morrow the LORD will
shew who are his, and who is holy; and will cause him to come near
unto him: even him whom he hath chosen will he cause to come near unto
him.

16:6 This do; Take you censers, Korah, and all his company; 16:7 And
put fire therein, and put incense in them before the LORD to morrow:
and it shall be that the man whom the LORD doth choose, he shall be
holy: ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi.

16:8 And Moses said unto Korah, Hear, I pray you, ye sons of Levi:
16:9 Seemeth it but a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel
hath separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near
to himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the LORD, and to
stand before the congregation to minister unto them?  16:10 And he
hath brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren the sons of Levi
with thee: and seek ye the priesthood also?  16:11 For which cause
both thou and all thy company are gathered together against the LORD:
and what is Aaron, that ye murmur against him?  16:12 And Moses sent
to call Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab: which said, We will not
come up: 16:13 Is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of
a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness,
except thou make thyself altogether a prince over us?  16:14 Moreover
thou hast not brought us into a land that floweth with milk and honey,
or given us inheritance of fields and vineyards: wilt thou put out the
eyes of these men? we will not come up.

16:15 And Moses was very wroth, and said unto the LORD, Respect not
thou their offering: I have not taken one ass from them, neither have
I hurt one of them.

16:16 And Moses said unto Korah, Be thou and all thy company before
the LORD, thou, and they, and Aaron, to morrow: 16:17 And take every
man his censer, and put incense in them, and bring ye before the LORD
every man his censer, two hundred and fifty censers; thou also, and
Aaron, each of you his censer.

16:18 And they took every man his censer, and put fire in them, and
laid incense thereon, and stood in the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation with Moses and Aaron.

16:19 And Korah gathered all the congregation against them unto the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the glory of the LORD
appeared unto all the congregation.

16:20 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 16:21
Separate yourselves from among this congregation, that I may consume
them in a moment.

16:22 And they fell upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of the
spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with
all the congregation?  16:23 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
16:24 Speak unto the congregation, saying, Get you up from about the
tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.

16:25 And Moses rose up and went unto Dathan and Abiram; and the
elders of Israel followed him.

16:26 And he spake unto the congregation, saying, Depart, I pray you,
from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of their's, lest
ye be consumed in all their sins.

16:27 So they gat up from the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram,
on every side: and Dathan and Abiram came out, and stood in the door
of their tents, and their wives, and their sons, and their little
children.

16:28 And Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that the LORD hath sent me
to do all these works; for I have not done them of mine own mind.

16:29 If these men die the common death of all men, or if they be
visited after the visitation of all men; then the LORD hath not sent
me.

16:30 But if the LORD make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth,
and swallow them up, with all that appertain unto them, and they go
down quick into the pit; then ye shall understand that these men have
provoked the LORD.

16:31 And it came to pass, as he had made an end of speaking all these
words, that the ground clave asunder that was under them: 16:32 And
the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses,
and all the men that appertained unto Korah, and all their goods.

16:33 They, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the
pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they perished from among the
congregation.

16:34 And all Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of
them: for they said, Lest the earth swallow us up also.

16:35 And there came out a fire from the LORD, and consumed the two
hundred and fifty men that offered incense.

16:36 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 16:37 Speak unto Eleazar
the son of Aaron the priest, that he take up the censers out of the
burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder; for they are hallowed.

16:38 The censers of these sinners against their own souls, let them
make them broad plates for a covering of the altar: for they offered
them before the LORD, therefore they are hallowed: and they shall be a
sign unto the children of Israel.

16:39 And Eleazar the priest took the brasen censers, wherewith they
that were burnt had offered; and they were made broad plates for a
covering of the altar: 16:40 To be a memorial unto the children of
Israel, that no stranger, which is not of the seed of Aaron, come near
to offer incense before the LORD; that he be not as Korah, and as his
company: as the LORD said to him by the hand of Moses.

16:41 But on the morrow all the congregation of the children of Israel
murmured against Moses and against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the
people of the LORD.

16:42 And it came to pass, when the congregation was gathered against
Moses and against Aaron, that they looked toward the tabernacle of the
congregation: and, behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of the
LORD appeared.

16:43 And Moses and Aaron came before the tabernacle of the
congregation.

16:44 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 16:45 Get you up from
among this congregation, that I may consume them as in a moment. And
they fell upon their faces.

16:46 And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a censer, and put fire therein
from off the altar, and put on incense, and go quickly unto the
congregation, and make an atonement for them: for there is wrath gone
out from the LORD; the plague is begun.

16:47 And Aaron took as Moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the
congregation; and, behold, the plague was begun among the people: and
he put on incense, and made an atonement for the people.

16:48 And he stood between the dead and the living; and the plague was
stayed.

16:49 Now they that died in the plague were fourteen thousand and
seven hundred, beside them that died about the matter of Korah.

16:50 And Aaron returned unto Moses unto the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation: and the plague was stayed.

17:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 17:2 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and take of every one of them a rod according to
the house of their fathers, of all their princes according to the
house of their fathers twelve rods: write thou every man's name upon
his rod.

17:3 And thou shalt write Aaron's name upon the rod of Levi: for one
rod shall be for the head of the house of their fathers.

17:4 And thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the congregation
before the testimony, where I will meet with you.

17:5 And it shall come to pass, that the man's rod, whom I shall
choose, shall blossom: and I will make to cease from me the murmurings
of the children of Israel, whereby they murmur against you.

17:6 And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, and every one of
their princes gave him a rod apiece, for each prince one, according to
their fathers' houses, even twelve rods: and the rod of Aaron was
among their rods.

17:7 And Moses laid up the rods before the LORD in the tabernacle of
witness.

17:8 And it came to pass, that on the morrow Moses went into the
tabernacle of witness; and, behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of
Levi was budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and
yielded almonds.

17:9 And Moses brought out all the rods from before the LORD unto all
the children of Israel: and they looked, and took every man his rod.

17:10 And the LORD said unto Moses, Bring Aaron's rod again before the
testimony, to be kept for a token against the rebels; and thou shalt
quite take away their murmurings from me, that they die not.

17:11 And Moses did so: as the LORD commanded him, so did he.

17:12 And the children of Israel spake unto Moses, saying, Behold, we
die, we perish, we all perish.

17:13 Whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the LORD
shall die: shall we be consumed with dying?  18:1 And the LORD said
unto Aaron, Thou and thy sons and thy father's house with thee shall
bear the iniquity of the sanctuary: and thou and thy sons with thee
shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.

18:2 And thy brethren also of the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy
father, bring thou with thee, that they may be joined unto thee, and
minister unto thee: but thou and thy sons with thee shall minister
before the tabernacle of witness.

18:3 And they shall keep thy charge, and the charge of all the
tabernacle: only they shall not come nigh the vessels of the sanctuary
and the altar, that neither they, nor ye also, die.

18:4 And they shall be joined unto thee, and keep the charge of the
tabernacle of the congregation, for all the service of the tabernacle:
and a stranger shall not come nigh unto you.

18:5 And ye shall keep the charge of the sanctuary, and the charge of
the altar: that there be no wrath any more upon the children of
Israel.

18:6 And I, behold, I have taken your brethren the Levites from among
the children of Israel: to you they are given as a gift for the LORD,
to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.

18:7 Therefore thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priest's
office for everything of the altar, and within the vail; and ye shall
serve: I have given your priest's office unto you as a service of
gift: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

18:8 And the LORD spake unto Aaron, Behold, I also have given thee the
charge of mine heave offerings of all the hallowed things of the
children of Israel; unto thee have I given them by reason of the
anointing, and to thy sons, by an ordinance for ever.

18:9 This shall be thine of the most holy things, reserved from the
fire: every oblation of theirs, every meat offering of theirs, and
every sin offering of theirs, and every trespass offering of theirs
which they shall render unto me, shall be most holy for thee and for
thy sons.

18:10 In the most holy place shalt thou eat it; every male shall eat
it: it shall be holy unto thee.

18:11 And this is thine; the heave offering of their gift, with all
the wave offerings of the children of Israel: I have given them unto
thee, and to thy sons and to thy daughters with thee, by a statute for
ever: every one that is clean in thy house shall eat of it.

18:12 All the best of the oil, and all the best of the wine, and of
the wheat, the firstfruits of them which they shall offer unto the
LORD, them have I given thee.

18:13 And whatsoever is first ripe in the land, which they shall bring
unto the LORD, shall be thine; every one that is clean in thine house
shall eat of it.

18:14 Every thing devoted in Israel shall be thine.

18:15 Every thing that openeth the matrix in all flesh, which they
bring unto the LORD, whether it be of men or beasts, shall be thine:
nevertheless the firstborn of man shalt thou surely redeem, and the
firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou redeem.

18:16 And those that are to be redeemed from a month old shalt thou
redeem, according to thine estimation, for the money of five shekels,
after the shekel of the sanctuary, which is twenty gerahs.

18:17 But the firstling of a cow, or the firstling of a sheep, or the
firstling of a goat, thou shalt not redeem; they are holy: thou shalt
sprinkle their blood upon the altar, and shalt burn their fat for an
offering made by fire, for a sweet savour unto the LORD.

18:18 And the flesh of them shall be thine, as the wave breast and as
the right shoulder are thine.

18:19 All the heave offerings of the holy things, which the children
of Israel offer unto the LORD, have I given thee, and thy sons and thy
daughters with thee, by a statute for ever: it is a covenant of salt
for ever before the LORD unto thee and to thy seed with thee.

18:20 And the LORD spake unto Aaron, Thou shalt have no inheritance in
their land, neither shalt thou have any part among them: I am thy part
and thine inheritance among the children of Israel.

18:21 And, behold, I have given the children of Levi all the tenth in
Israel for an inheritance, for their service which they serve, even
the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.

18:22 Neither must the children of Israel henceforth come nigh the
tabernacle of the congregation, lest they bear sin, and die.

18:23 But the Levites shall do the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and they shall bear their iniquity: it shall be a
statute for ever throughout your generations, that among the children
of Israel they have no inheritance.

18:24 But the tithes of the children of Israel, which they offer as an
heave offering unto the LORD, I have given to the Levites to inherit:
therefore I have said unto them, Among the children of Israel they
shall have no inheritance.

18:25 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 18:26 Thus speak unto the
Levites, and say unto them, When ye take of the children of Israel the
tithes which I have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye
shall offer up an heave offering of it for the LORD, even a tenth part
of the tithe.

18:27 And this your heave offering shall be reckoned unto you, as
though it were the corn of the threshingfloor, and as the fulness of
the winepress.

18:28 Thus ye also shall offer an heave offering unto the LORD of all
your tithes, which ye receive of the children of Israel; and ye shall
give thereof the LORD's heave offering to Aaron the priest.

18:29 Out of all your gifts ye shall offer every heave offering of the
LORD, of all the best thereof, even the hallowed part thereof out of
it.

18:30 Therefore thou shalt say unto them, When ye have heaved the best
thereof from it, then it shall be counted unto the Levites as the
increase of the threshingfloor, and as the increase of the winepress.

18:31 And ye shall eat it in every place, ye and your households: for
it is your reward for your service in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

18:32 And ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, when ye have heaved
from it the best of it: neither shall ye pollute the holy things of
the children of Israel, lest ye die.

19:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 19:2 This
is the ordinance of the law which the LORD hath commanded, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring thee a red heifer
without spot, wherein is no blemish, and upon which never came yoke:
19:3 And ye shall give her unto Eleazar the priest, that he may bring
her forth without the camp, and one shall slay her before his face:
19:4 And Eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his finger,
and sprinkle of her blood directly before the tabernacle of the
congregation seven times: 19:5 And one shall burn the heifer in his
sight; her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, with her dung, shall he
burn: 19:6 And the priest shall take cedar wood, and hyssop, and
scarlet, and cast it into the midst of the burning of the heifer.

19:7 Then the priest shall wash his clothes, and he shall bathe his
flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp, and the
priest shall be unclean until the even.

19:8 And he that burneth her shall wash his clothes in water, and
bathe his flesh in water, and shall be unclean until the even.

19:9 And a man that is clean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer,
and lay them up without the camp in a clean place, and it shall be
kept for the congregation of the children of Israel for a water of
separation: it is a purification for sin.

19:10 And he that gathereth the ashes of the heifer shall wash his
clothes, and be unclean until the even: and it shall be unto the
children of Israel, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among them,
for a statute for ever.

19:11 He that toucheth the dead body of any man shall be unclean seven
days.

19:12 He shall purify himself with it on the third day, and on the
seventh day he shall be clean: but if he purify not himself the third
day, then the seventh day he shall not be clean.

19:13 Whosoever toucheth the dead body of any man that is dead, and
purifieth not himself, defileth the tabernacle of the LORD; and that
soul shall be cut off from Israel: because the water of separation was
not sprinkled upon him, he shall be unclean; his uncleanness is yet
upon him.

19:14 This is the law, when a man dieth in a tent: all that come into
the tent, and all that is in the tent, shall be unclean seven days.

19:15 And every open vessel, which hath no covering bound upon it, is
unclean.

19:16 And whosoever toucheth one that is slain with a sword in the
open fields, or a dead body, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be
unclean seven days.

19:17 And for an unclean person they shall take of the ashes of the
burnt heifer of purification for sin, and running water shall be put
thereto in a vessel: 19:18 And a clean person shall take hyssop, and
dip it in the water, and sprinkle it upon the tent, and upon all the
vessels, and upon the persons that were there, and upon him that
touched a bone, or one slain, or one dead, or a grave: 19:19 And the
clean person shall sprinkle upon the unclean on the third day, and on
the seventh day: and on the seventh day he shall purify himself, and
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and shall be clean at
even.

19:20 But the man that shall be unclean, and shall not purify himself,
that soul shall be cut off from among the congregation, because he
hath defiled the sanctuary of the LORD: the water of separation hath
not been sprinkled upon him; he is unclean.

19:21 And it shall be a perpetual statute unto them, that he that
sprinkleth the water of separation shall wash his clothes; and he that
toucheth the water of separation shall be unclean until even.

19:22 And whatsoever the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean; and
the soul that toucheth it shall be unclean until even.

20:1 Then came the children of Israel, even the whole congregation,
into the desert of Zin in the first month: and the people abode in
Kadesh; and Miriam died there, and was buried there.

20:2 And there was no water for the congregation: and they gathered
themselves together against Moses and against Aaron.

20:3 And the people chode with Moses, and spake, saying, Would God
that we had died when our brethren died before the LORD!  20:4 And why
have ye brought up the congregation of the LORD into this wilderness,
that we and our cattle should die there?  20:5 And wherefore have ye
made us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place?
it is no place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates;
neither is there any water to drink.

20:6 And Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly unto
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they fell upon
their faces: and the glory of the LORD appeared unto them.

20:7 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 20:8 Take the rod, and
gather thou the assembly together, thou, and Aaron thy brother, and
speak ye unto the rock before their eyes; and it shall give forth his
water, and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock: so
thou shalt give the congregation and their beasts drink.

20:9 And Moses took the rod from before the LORD, as he commanded him.

20:10 And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before
the rock, and he said unto them, Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch
you water out of this rock?  20:11 And Moses lifted up his hand, and
with his rod he smote the rock twice: and the water came out
abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts also.

20:12 And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye believed me
not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore
ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given
them.

20:13 This is the water of Meribah; because the children of Israel
strove with the LORD, and he was sanctified in them.

20:14 And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh unto the king of Edom,
Thus saith thy brother Israel, Thou knowest all the travail that hath
befallen us: 20:15 How our fathers went down into Egypt, and we have
dwelt in Egypt a long time; and the Egyptians vexed us, and our
fathers: 20:16 And when we cried unto the LORD, he heard our voice,
and sent an angel, and hath brought us forth out of Egypt: and,
behold, we are in Kadesh, a city in the uttermost of thy border: 20:17
Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy country: we will not pass
through the fields, or through the vineyards, neither will we drink of
the water of the wells: we will go by the king's high way, we will not
turn to the right hand nor to the left, until we have passed thy
borders.

20:18 And Edom said unto him, Thou shalt not pass by me, lest I come
out against thee with the sword.

20:19 And the children of Israel said unto him, We will go by the high
way: and if I and my cattle drink of thy water, then I will pay for
it: I will only, without doing anything else, go through on my feet.

20:20 And he said, Thou shalt not go through. And Edom came out
against him with much people, and with a strong hand.

20:21 Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border:
wherefore Israel turned away from him.

20:22 And the children of Israel, even the whole congregation,
journeyed from Kadesh, and came unto mount Hor.

20:23 And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron in mount Hor, by the
coast of the land of Edom, saying, 20:24 Aaron shall be gathered unto
his people: for he shall not enter into the land which I have given
unto the children of Israel, because ye rebelled against my word at
the water of Meribah.

20:25 Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and bring them up unto mount
Hor: 20:26 And strip Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar
