his son: and Aaron shall be gathered unto his people, and shall die
there.

20:27 And Moses did as the LORD commanded: and they went up into mount
Hor in the sight of all the congregation.

20:28 And Moses stripped Aaron of his garments, and put them upon
Eleazar his son; and Aaron died there in the top of the mount: and
Moses and Eleazar came down from the mount.

20:29 And when all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they
mourned for Aaron thirty days, even all the house of Israel.

21:1 And when king Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south, heard
tell that Israel came by the way of the spies; then he fought against
Israel, and took some of them prisoners.

21:2 And Israel vowed a vow unto the LORD, and said, If thou wilt
indeed deliver this people into my hand, then I will utterly destroy
their cities.

21:3 And the LORD hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up
the Canaanites; and they utterly destroyed them and their cities: and
he called the name of the place Hormah.

21:4 And they journeyed from mount Hor by the way of the Red sea, to
compass the land of Edom: and the soul of the people was much
discouraged because of the way.

21:5 And the people spake against God, and against Moses, Wherefore
have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? for there
is no bread, neither is there any water; and our soul loatheth this
light bread.

21:6 And the LORD sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit
the people; and much people of Israel died.

21:7 Therefore the people came to Moses, and said, We have sinned, for
we have spoken against the LORD, and against thee; pray unto the LORD,
that he take away the serpents from us. And Moses prayed for the
people.

21:8 And the LORD said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery serpent, and set
it upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that every one that is
bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live.

21:9 And Moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it
came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the
serpent of brass, he lived.

21:10 And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in Oboth.

21:11 And they journeyed from Oboth, and pitched at Ijeabarim, in the
wilderness which is before Moab, toward the sunrising.

21:12 From thence they removed, and pitched in the valley of Zared.

21:13 From thence they removed, and pitched on the other side of
Arnon, which is in the wilderness that cometh out of the coasts of the
Amorites: for Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab and the
Amorites.

21:14 Wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of the LORD, What
he did in the Red sea, and in the brooks of Arnon, 21:15 And at the
stream of the brooks that goeth down to the dwelling of Ar, and lieth
upon the border of Moab.

21:16 And from thence they went to Beer: that is the well whereof the
LORD spake unto Moses, Gather the people together, and I will give
them water.

21:17 Then Israel sang this song, Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it:
21:18 The princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged it,
by the direction of the lawgiver, with their staves. And from the
wilderness they went to Mattanah: 21:19 And from Mattanah to Nahaliel:
and from Nahaliel to Bamoth: 21:20 And from Bamoth in the valley, that
is in the country of Moab, to the top of Pisgah, which looketh toward
Jeshimon.

21:21 And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites,
saying, 21:22 Let me pass through thy land: we will not turn into the
fields, or into the vineyards; we will not drink of the waters of the
well: but we will go along by the king's high way, until we be past
thy borders.

21:23 And Sihon would not suffer Israel to pass through his border:
but Sihon gathered all his people together, and went out against
Israel into the wilderness: and he came to Jahaz, and fought against
Israel.

21:24 And Israel smote him with the edge of the sword, and possessed
his land from Arnon unto Jabbok, even unto the children of Ammon: for
the border of the children of Ammon was strong.

21:25 And Israel took all these cities: and Israel dwelt in all the
cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in all the villages thereof.

21:26 For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the king of the Amorites, who
had fought against the former king of Moab, and taken all his land out
of his hand, even unto Arnon.

21:27 Wherefore they that speak in proverbs say, Come into Heshbon,
let the city of Sihon be built and prepared: 21:28 For there is a fire
gone out of Heshbon, a flame from the city of Sihon: it hath consumed
Ar of Moab, and the lords of the high places of Arnon.

21:29 Woe to thee, Moab! thou art undone, O people of Chemosh: he hath
given his sons that escaped, and his daughters, into captivity unto
Sihon king of the Amorites.

21:30 We have shot at them; Heshbon is perished even unto Dibon, and
we have laid them waste even unto Nophah, which reacheth unto Medeba.

21:31 Thus Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorites.

21:32 And Moses sent to spy out Jaazer, and they took the villages
thereof, and drove out the Amorites that were there.

21:33 And they turned and went up by the way of Bashan: and Og the
king of Bashan went out against them, he, and all his people, to the
battle at Edrei.

21:34 And the LORD said unto Moses, Fear him not: for I have delivered
him into thy hand, and all his people, and his land; and thou shalt do
to him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at
Heshbon.

21:35 So they smote him, and his sons, and all his people, until there
was none left him alive: and they possessed his land.

22:1 And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in the plains
of Moab on this side Jordan by Jericho.

22:2 And Balak the son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the
Amorites.

22:3 And Moab was sore afraid of the people, because they were many:
and Moab was distressed because of the children of Israel.

22:4 And Moab said unto the elders of Midian, Now shall this company
lick up all that are round about us, as the ox licketh up the grass of
the field.

And Balak the son of Zippor was king of the Moabites at that time.

22:5 He sent messengers therefore unto Balaam the son of Beor to
Pethor, which is by the river of the land of the children of his
people, to call him, saying, Behold, there is a people come out from
Egypt: behold, they cover the face of the earth, and they abide over
against me: 22:6 Come now therefore, I pray thee, curse me this
people; for they are too mighty for me: peradventure I shall prevail,
that we may smite them, and that I may drive them out of the land: for
I wot that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest
is cursed.

22:7 And the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the
rewards of divination in their hand; and they came unto Balaam, and
spake unto him the words of Balak.

22:8 And he said unto them, Lodge here this night, and I will bring
you word again, as the LORD shall speak unto me: and the princes of
Moab abode with Balaam.

22:9 And God came unto Balaam, and said, What men are these with thee?
22:10 And Balaam said unto God, Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab,
hath sent unto me, saying, 22:11 Behold, there is a people come out of
Egypt, which covereth the face of the earth: come now, curse me them;
peradventure I shall be able to overcome them, and drive them out.

22:12 And God said unto Balaam, Thou shalt not go with them; thou
shalt not curse the people: for they are blessed.

22:13 And Balaam rose up in the morning, and said unto the princes of
Balak, Get you into your land: for the LORD refuseth to give me leave
to go with you.

22:14 And the princes of Moab rose up, and they went unto Balak, and
said, Balaam refuseth to come with us.

22:15 And Balak sent yet again princes, more, and more honourable than
they.

22:16 And they came to Balaam, and said to him, Thus saith Balak the
son of Zippor, Let nothing, I pray thee, hinder thee from coming unto
me: 22:17 For I will promote thee unto very great honour, and I will
do whatsoever thou sayest unto me: come therefore, I pray thee, curse
me this people.

22:18 And Balaam answered and said unto the servants of Balak, If
Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go
beyond the word of the LORD my God, to do less or more.

22:19 Now therefore, I pray you, tarry ye also here this night, that I
may know what the LORD will say unto me more.

22:20 And God came unto Balaam at night, and said unto him, If the men
come to call thee, rise up, and go with them; but yet the word which I
shall say unto thee, that shalt thou do.

22:21 And Balaam rose up in the morning, and saddled his ass, and went
with the princes of Moab.

22:22 And God's anger was kindled because he went: and the angel of
the LORD stood in the way for an adversary against him. Now he was
riding upon his ass, and his two servants were with him.

22:23 And the ass saw the angel of the LORD standing in the way, and
his sword drawn in his hand: and the ass turned aside out of the way,
and went into the field: and Balaam smote the ass, to turn her into
the way.

22:24 But the angel of the LORD stood in a path of the vineyards, a
wall being on this side, and a wall on that side.

22:25 And when the ass saw the angel of the LORD, she thrust herself
unto the wall, and crushed Balaam's foot against the wall: and he
smote her again.

22:26 And the angel of the LORD went further, and stood in a narrow
place, where was no way to turn either to the right hand or to the
left.

22:27 And when the ass saw the angel of the LORD, she fell down under
Balaam: and Balaam's anger was kindled, and he smote the ass with a
staff.

22:28 And the LORD opened the mouth of the ass, and she said unto
Balaam, What have I done unto thee, that thou hast smitten me these
three times?  22:29 And Balaam said unto the ass, Because thou hast
mocked me: I would there were a sword in mine hand, for now would I
kill thee.

22:30 And the ass said unto Balaam, Am not I thine ass, upon which
thou hast ridden ever since I was thine unto this day? was I ever wont
to do so unto thee? And he said, Nay.

22:31 Then the LORD opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the angel of
the LORD standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand: and he
bowed down his head, and fell flat on his face.

22:32 And the angel of the LORD said unto him, Wherefore hast thou
smitten thine ass these three times? behold, I went out to withstand
thee, because thy way is perverse before me: 22:33 And the ass saw me,
and turned from me these three times: unless she had turned from me,
surely now also I had slain thee, and saved her alive.

22:34 And Balaam said unto the angel of the LORD, I have sinned; for I
knew not that thou stoodest in the way against me: now therefore, if
it displease thee, I will get me back again.

22:35 And the angel of the LORD said unto Balaam, Go with the men: but
only the word that I shall speak unto thee, that thou shalt speak. So
Balaam went with the princes of Balak.

22:36 And when Balak heard that Balaam was come, he went out to meet
him unto a city of Moab, which is in the border of Arnon, which is in
the utmost coast.

22:37 And Balak said unto Balaam, Did I not earnestly send unto thee
to call thee? wherefore camest thou not unto me? am I not able indeed
to promote thee to honour?  22:38 And Balaam said unto Balak, Lo, I am
come unto thee: have I now any power at all to say any thing? the word
that God putteth in my mouth, that shall I speak.

22:39 And Balaam went with Balak, and they came unto Kirjathhuzoth.

22:40 And Balak offered oxen and sheep, and sent to Balaam, and to the
princes that were with him.

22:41 And it came to pass on the morrow, that Balak took Balaam, and
brought him up into the high places of Baal, that thence he might see
the utmost part of the people.

23:1 And Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and
prepare me here seven oxen and seven rams.

23:2 And Balak did as Balaam had spoken; and Balak and Balaam offered
on every altar a bullock and a ram.

23:3 And Balaam said unto Balak, Stand by thy burnt offering, and I
will go: peradventure the LORD will come to meet me: and whatsoever he
sheweth me I will tell thee. And he went to an high place.

23:4 And God met Balaam: and he said unto him, I have prepared seven
altars, and I have offered upon every altar a bullock and a ram.

23:5 And the LORD put a word in Balaam's mouth, and said, Return unto
Balak, and thus thou shalt speak.

23:6 And he returned unto him, and, lo, he stood by his burnt
sacrifice, he, and all the princes of Moab.

23:7 And he took up his parable, and said, Balak the king of Moab hath
brought me from Aram, out of the mountains of the east, saying, Come,
curse me Jacob, and come, defy Israel.

23:8 How shall I curse, whom God hath not cursed? or how shall I defy,
whom the LORD hath not defied?  23:9 For from the top of the rocks I
see him, and from the hills I behold him: lo, the people shall dwell
alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations.

23:10 Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth
part of Israel? Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last
end be like his!  23:11 And Balak said unto Balaam, What hast thou
done unto me? I took thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou
hast blessed them altogether.

23:12 And he answered and said, Must I not take heed to speak that
which the LORD hath put in my mouth?  23:13 And Balak said unto him,
Come, I pray thee, with me unto another place, from whence thou mayest
see them: thou shalt see but the utmost part of them, and shalt not
see them all: and curse me them from thence.

23:14 And he brought him into the field of Zophim, to the top of
Pisgah, and built seven altars, and offered a bullock and a ram on
every altar.

23:15 And he said unto Balak, Stand here by thy burnt offering, while
I meet the LORD yonder.

23:16 And the LORD met Balaam, and put a word in his mouth, and said,
Go again unto Balak, and say thus.

23:17 And when he came to him, behold, he stood by his burnt offering,
and the princes of Moab with him. And Balak said unto him, What hath
the LORD spoken?  23:18 And he took up his parable, and said, Rise up,
Balak, and hear; hearken unto me, thou son of Zippor: 23:19 God is not
a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should
repent: hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and
shall he not make it good?  23:20 Behold, I have received commandment
to bless: and he hath blessed; and I cannot reverse it.

23:21 He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen
perverseness in Israel: the LORD his God is with him, and the shout of
a king is among them.

23:22 God brought them out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength
of an unicorn.

23:23 Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there
any divination against Israel: according to this time it shall be said
of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought!  23:24 Behold, the
people shall rise up as a great lion, and lift up himself as a young
lion: he shall not lie down until he eat of the prey, and drink the
blood of the slain.

23:25 And Balak said unto Balaam, Neither curse them at all, nor bless
them at all.

23:26 But Balaam answered and said unto Balak, Told not I thee,
saying, All that the LORD speaketh, that I must do?  23:27 And Balak
said unto Balaam, Come, I pray thee, I will bring thee unto another
place; peradventure it will please God that thou mayest curse me them
from thence.

23:28 And Balak brought Balaam unto the top of Peor, that looketh
toward Jeshimon.

23:29 And Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and
prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.

23:30 And Balak did as Balaam had said, and offered a bullock and a
ram on every altar.

24:1 And when Balaam saw that it pleased the LORD to bless Israel, he
went not, as at other times, to seek for enchantments, but he set his
face toward the wilderness.

24:2 And Balaam lifted up his eyes, and he saw Israel abiding in his
tents according to their tribes; and the spirit of God came upon him.

24:3 And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor hath
said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said: 24:4 He hath said,
which heard the words of God, which saw the vision of the Almighty,
falling into a trance, but having his eyes open: 24:5 How goodly are
thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel!  24:6 As the
valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river's side, as the
trees of lign aloes which the LORD hath planted, and as cedar trees
beside the waters.

24:7 He shall pour the water out of his buckets, and his seed shall be
in many waters, and his king shall be higher than Agag, and his
kingdom shall be exalted.

24:8 God brought him forth out of Egypt; he hath as it were the
strength of an unicorn: he shall eat up the nations his enemies, and
shall break their bones, and pierce them through with his arrows.

24:9 He couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a great lion: who shall
stir him up? Blessed is he that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that
curseth thee.

24:10 And Balak's anger was kindled against Balaam, and he smote his
hands together: and Balak said unto Balaam, I called thee to curse
mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast altogether blessed them these
three times.

24:11 Therefore now flee thou to thy place: I thought to promote thee
unto great honour; but, lo, the LORD hath kept thee back from honour.

24:12 And Balaam said unto Balak, Spake I not also to thy messengers
which thou sentest unto me, saying, 24:13 If Balak would give me his
house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the commandment of
the LORD, to do either good or bad of mine own mind; but what the LORD
saith, that will I speak?  24:14 And now, behold, I go unto my people:
come therefore, and I will advertise thee what this people shall do to
thy people in the latter days.

24:15 And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor
hath said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said: 24:16 He hath
said, which heard the words of God, and knew the knowledge of the most
High, which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling into a trance, but
having his eyes open: 24:17 I shall see him, but not now: I shall
behold him, but not nigh: there shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a
Sceptre shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab,
and destroy all the children of Sheth.

24:18 And Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession
for his enemies; and Israel shall do valiantly.

24:19 Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, and shall
destroy him that remaineth of the city.

24:20 And when he looked on Amalek, he took up his parable, and said,
Amalek was the first of the nations; but his latter end shall be that
he perish for ever.

24:21 And he looked on the Kenites, and took up his parable, and said,
Strong is thy dwellingplace, and thou puttest thy nest in a rock.

24:22 Nevertheless the Kenite shall be wasted, until Asshur shall
carry thee away captive.

24:23 And he took up his parable, and said, Alas, who shall live when
God doeth this!  24:24 And ships shall come from the coast of Chittim,
and shall afflict Asshur, and shall afflict Eber, and he also shall
perish for ever.

24:25 And Balaam rose up, and went and returned to his place: and
Balak also went his way.

25:1 And Israel abode in Shittim, and the people began to commit
whoredom with the daughters of Moab.

25:2 And they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods: and
the people did eat, and bowed down to their gods.

25:3 And Israel joined himself unto Baalpeor: and the anger of the
LORD was kindled against Israel.

25:4 And the LORD said unto Moses, Take all the heads of the people,
and hang them up before the LORD against the sun, that the fierce
anger of the LORD may be turned away from Israel.

25:5 And Moses said unto the judges of Israel, Slay ye every one his
men that were joined unto Baalpeor.

25:6 And, behold, one of the children of Israel came and brought unto
his brethren a Midianitish woman in the sight of Moses, and in the
sight of all the congregation of the children of Israel, who were
weeping before the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

25:7 And when Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the
priest, saw it, he rose up from among the congregation, and took a
javelin in his hand; 25:8 And he went after the man of Israel into the
tent, and thrust both of them through, the man of Israel, and the
woman through her belly. So the plague was stayed from the children of
Israel.

25:9 And those that died in the plague were twenty and four thousand.

25:10 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 25:11 Phinehas, the son
of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath away
from the children of Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among
them, that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy.

25:12 Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace:
25:13 And he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant
of an everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his God, and
made an atonement for the children of Israel.

25:14 Now the name of the Israelite that was slain, even that was
slain with the Midianitish woman, was Zimri, the son of Salu, a prince
of a chief house among the Simeonites.

25:15 And the name of the Midianitish woman that was slain was Cozbi,
the daughter of Zur; he was head over a people, and of a chief house
in Midian.

25:16 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 25:17 Vex the Midianites,
and smite them: 25:18 For they vex you with their wiles, wherewith
they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor, and in the matter of
Cozbi, the daughter of a prince of Midian, their sister, which was
slain in the day of the plague for Peor's sake.

26:1 And it came to pass after the plague, that the LORD spake unto
Moses and unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, saying, 26:2 Take
the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel, from twenty
years old and upward, throughout their fathers' house, all that are
able to go to war in Israel.

26:3 And Moses and Eleazar the priest spake with them in the plains of
Moab by Jordan near Jericho, saying, 26:4 Take the sum of the people,
from twenty years old and upward; as the LORD commanded Moses and the
children of Israel, which went forth out of the land of Egypt.

26:5 Reuben, the eldest son of Israel: the children of Reuben; Hanoch,
of whom cometh the family of the Hanochites: of Pallu, the family of
the Palluites: 26:6 Of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Carmi,
the family of the Carmites.

26:7 These are the families of the Reubenites: and they that were
numbered of them were forty and three thousand and seven hundred and
thirty.

26:8 And the sons of Pallu; Eliab.

26:9 And the sons of Eliab; Nemuel, and Dathan, and Abiram. This is
that Dathan and Abiram, which were famous in the congregation, who
strove against Moses and against Aaron in the company of Korah, when
they strove against the LORD: 26:10 And the earth opened her mouth,
and swallowed them up together with Korah, when that company died,
what time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men: and they became
a sign.

26:11 Notwithstanding the children of Korah died not.

26:12 The sons of Simeon after their families: of Nemuel, the family
of the Nemuelites: of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites: of Jachin,
the family of the Jachinites: 26:13 Of Zerah, the family of the
Zarhites: of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites.

26:14 These are the families of the Simeonites, twenty and two
thousand and two hundred.

26:15 The children of Gad after their families: of Zephon, the family
of the Zephonites: of Haggi, the family of the Haggites: of Shuni, the
family of the Shunites: 26:16 Of Ozni, the family of the Oznites: of
Eri, the family of the Erites: 26:17 Of Arod, the family of the
Arodites: of Areli, the family of the Arelites.

26:18 These are the families of the children of Gad according to those
that were numbered of them, forty thousand and five hundred.

26:19 The sons of Judah were Er and Onan: and Er and Onan died in the
land of Canaan.

26:20 And the sons of Judah after their families were; of Shelah, the
family of the Shelanites: of Pharez, the family of the Pharzites: of
Zerah, the family of the Zarhites.

26:21 And the sons of Pharez were; of Hezron, the family of the
Hezronites: of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.

26:22 These are the families of Judah according to those that were
numbered of them, threescore and sixteen thousand and five hundred.

26:23 Of the sons of Issachar after their families: of Tola, the
family of the Tolaites: of Pua, the family of the Punites: 26:24 Of
Jashub, the family of the Jashubites: of Shimron, the family of the
Shimronites.

26:25 These are the families of Issachar according to those that were
numbered of them, threescore and four thousand and three hundred.

26:26 Of the sons of Zebulun after their families: of Sered, the
family of the Sardites: of Elon, the family of the Elonites: of
Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.

26:27 These are the families of the Zebulunites according to those
that were numbered of them, threescore thousand and five hundred.

26:28 The sons of Joseph after their families were Manasseh and
Ephraim.

26:29 Of the sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the family of the
Machirites: and Machir begat Gilead: of Gilead come the family of the
Gileadites.

26:30 These are the sons of Gilead: of Jeezer, the family of the
Jeezerites: of Helek, the family of the Helekites: 26:31 And of
Asriel, the family of the Asrielites: and of Shechem, the family of
the Shechemites: 26:32 And of Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites:
and of Hepher, the family of the Hepherites.

26:33 And Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no sons, but daughters: and
the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were Mahlah, and Noah,
Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.

26:34 These are the families of Manasseh, and those that were numbered
of them, fifty and two thousand and seven hundred.

26:35 These are the sons of Ephraim after their families: of
Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthalhites: of Becher, the family of
the Bachrites: of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.

26:36 And these are the sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the
Eranites.

26:37 These are the families of the sons of Ephraim according to those
that were numbered of them, thirty and two thousand and five hundred.
These are the sons of Joseph after their families.

26:38 The sons of Benjamin after their families: of Bela, the family
of the Belaites: of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites: of Ahiram,
the family of the Ahiramites: 26:39 Of Shupham, the family of the
Shuphamites: of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.

26:40 And the sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: of Ard, the family of
the Ardites: and of Naaman, the family of the Naamites.

26:41 These are the sons of Benjamin after their families: and they
that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and six
hundred.

26:42 These are the sons of Dan after their families: of Shuham, the
family of the Shuhamites. These are the families of Dan after their
families.

26:43 All the families of the Shuhamites, according to those that were
numbered of them, were threescore and four thousand and four hundred.

26:44 Of the children of Asher after their families: of Jimna, the
family of the Jimnites: of Jesui, the family of the Jesuites: of
Beriah, the family of the Beriites.

26:45 Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of the Heberites: of
Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites.

26:46 And the name of the daughter of Asher was Sarah.

26:47 These are the families of the sons of Asher according to those
that were numbered of them; who were fifty and three thousand and four
hundred.

26:48 Of the sons of Naphtali after their families: of Jahzeel, the
family of the Jahzeelites: of Guni, the family of the Gunites: 26:49
Of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites: of Shillem, the family of the
Shillemites.

26:50 These are the families of Naphtali according to their families:
and they that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and
four hundred.

26:51 These were the numbered of the children of Israel, six hundred
thousand and a thousand seven hundred and thirty.

26:52 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 26:53 Unto these the land
shall be divided for an inheritance according to the number of names.

26:54 To many thou shalt give the more inheritance, and to few thou
shalt give the less inheritance: to every one shall his inheritance be
given according to those that were numbered of him.

26:55 Notwithstanding the land shall be divided by lot: according to
the names of the tribes of their fathers they shall inherit.

26:56 According to the lot shall the possession thereof be divided
between many and few.

26:57 And these are they that were numbered of the Levites after their
families: of Gershon, the family of the Gershonites: of Kohath, the
family of the Kohathites: of Merari, the family of the Merarites.

26:58 These are the families of the Levites: the family of the
Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites,
the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korathites. And Kohath
begat Amram.

26:59 And the name of Amram's wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi,
whom her mother bare to Levi in Egypt: and she bare unto Amram Aaron
and Moses, and Miriam their sister.

26:60 And unto Aaron was born Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

26:61 And Nadab and Abihu died, when they offered strange fire before
the LORD.

26:62 And those that were numbered of them were twenty and three
thousand, all males from a month old and upward: for they were not
numbered among the children of Israel, because there was no
inheritance given them among the children of Israel.

26:63 These are they that were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the
priest, who numbered the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by
Jordan near Jericho.

26:64 But among these there was not a man of them whom Moses and Aaron
the priest numbered, when they numbered the children of Israel in the
wilderness of Sinai.

26:65 For the LORD had said of them, They shall surely die in the
wilderness. And there was not left a man of them, save Caleb the son
of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.

27:1 Then came the daughters of Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son
of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of
Manasseh the son of Joseph: and these are the names of his daughters;
Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Tirzah.

27:2 And they stood before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and
before the princes and all the congregation, by the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 27:3 Our father died in the
wilderness, and he was not in the company of them that gathered
themselves together against the LORD in the company of Korah; but died
in his own sin, and had no sons.

27:4 Why should the name of our father be done away from among his
family, because he hath no son? Give unto us therefore a possession
among the brethren of our father.

27:5 And Moses brought their cause before the LORD.

27:6 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 27:7 The daughters of
Zelophehad speak right: thou shalt surely give them a possession of an
inheritance among their father's brethren; and thou shalt cause the
inheritance of their father to pass unto them.

27:8 And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a
man die, and have no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass
unto his daughter.

27:9 And if he have no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance
unto his brethren.

27:10 And if he have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance
unto his father's brethren.

27:11 And if his father have no brethren, then ye shall give his
inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him of his family, and he
shall possess it: and it shall be unto the children of Israel a
statute of judgment, as the LORD commanded Moses.

27:12 And the LORD said unto Moses, Get thee up into this mount
Abarim, and see the land which I have given unto the children of
Israel.

27:13 And when thou hast seen it, thou also shalt be gathered unto thy
people, as Aaron thy brother was gathered.

27:14 For ye rebelled against my commandment in the desert of Zin, in
the strife of the congregation, to sanctify me at the water before
their eyes: that is the water of Meribah in Kadesh in the wilderness
of Zin.

27:15 And Moses spake unto the LORD, saying, 27:16 Let the LORD, the
God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation,
27:17 Which may go out before them, and which may go in before them,
and which may lead them out, and which may bring them in; that the
congregation of the LORD be not as sheep which have no shepherd.

27:18 And the LORD said unto Moses, Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a
man in whom is the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him; 27:19 And set
him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation; and
give him a charge in their sight.

27:20 And thou shalt put some of thine honour upon him, that all the
congregation of the children of Israel may be obedient.

27:21 And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall ask
counsel for him after the judgment of Urim before the LORD: at his
word shall they go out, and at his word they shall come in, both he,
and all the children of Israel with him, even all the congregation.

27:22 And Moses did as the LORD commanded him: and he took Joshua, and
set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation:
27:23 And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the
LORD commanded by the hand of Moses.

28:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 28:2 Command the children
of Israel, and say unto them, My offering, and my bread for my
sacrifices made by fire, for a sweet savour unto me, shall ye observe
to offer unto me in their due season.

28:3 And thou shalt say unto them, This is the offering made by fire
which ye shall offer unto the LORD; two lambs of the first year
without spot day by day, for a continual burnt offering.

28:4 The one lamb shalt thou offer in the morning, and the other lamb
shalt thou offer at even; 28:5 And a tenth part of an ephah of flour
for a meat offering, mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten
oil.

28:6 It is a continual burnt offering, which was ordained in mount
Sinai for a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD.

28:7 And the drink offering thereof shall be the fourth part of an hin
for the one lamb: in the holy place shalt thou cause the strong wine
to be poured unto the LORD for a drink offering.

28:8 And the other lamb shalt thou offer at even: as the meat offering
of the morning, and as the drink offering thereof, thou shalt offer
it, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.

28:9 And on the sabbath day two lambs of the first year without spot,
and two tenth deals of flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil,
and the drink offering thereof: 28:10 This is the burnt offering of
every sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink
offering.

28:11 And in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt
offering unto the LORD; two young bullocks, and one ram, seven lambs
of the first year without spot; 28:12 And three tenth deals of flour
for a meat offering, mingled with oil, for one bullock; and two tenth
deals of flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, for one ram;
28:13 And a several tenth deal of flour mingled with oil for a meat
offering unto one lamb; for a burnt offering of a sweet savour, a
sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD.

28:14 And their drink offerings shall be half an hin of wine unto a
bullock, and the third part of an hin unto a ram, and a fourth part of
an hin unto a lamb: this is the burnt offering of every month
throughout the months of the year.

28:15 And one kid of the goats for a sin offering unto the LORD shall
be offered, beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink
offering.

28:16 And in the fourteenth day of the first month is the passover of
the LORD.

28:17 And in the fifteenth day of this month is the feast: seven days
shall unleavened bread be eaten.

28:18 In the first day shall be an holy convocation; ye shall do no
manner of servile work therein: 28:19 But ye shall offer a sacrifice
made by fire for a burnt offering unto the LORD; two young bullocks,
and one ram, and seven lambs of the first year: they shall be unto you
without blemish: 28:20 And their meat offering shall be of flour
mingled with oil: three tenth deals shall ye offer for a bullock, and
two tenth deals for a ram; 28:21 A several tenth deal shalt thou offer
for every lamb, throughout the seven lambs: 28:22 And one goat for a
sin offering, to make an atonement for you.

28:23 Ye shall offer these beside the burnt offering in the morning,
which is for a continual burnt offering.

28:24 After this manner ye shall offer daily, throughout the seven
days, the meat of the sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto
the LORD: it shall be offered beside the continual burnt offering, and
his drink offering.

28:25 And on the seventh day ye shall have an holy convocation; ye
shall do no servile work.

28:26 Also in the day of the firstfruits, when ye bring a new meat
offering unto the LORD, after your weeks be out, ye shall have an holy
convocation; ye shall do no servile work: 28:27 But ye shall offer the
burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the LORD; two young bullocks,
one ram, seven lambs of the first year; 28:28 And their meat offering
of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals unto one bullock, two
tenth deals unto one ram, 28:29 A several tenth deal unto one lamb,
throughout the seven lambs; 28:30 And one kid of the goats, to make an
atonement for you.

28:31 Ye shall offer them beside the continual burnt offering, and his
meat offering, (they shall be unto you without blemish) and their
drink offerings.

29:1 And in the seventh month, on the first day of the month, ye shall
have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work: it is a day of
blowing the trumpets unto you.

29:2 And ye shall offer a burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the
LORD; one young bullock, one ram, and seven lambs of the first year
without blemish: 29:3 And their meat offering shall be of flour
mingled with oil, three tenth deals for a bullock, and two tenth deals
for a ram, 29:4 And one tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven
lambs: 29:5 And one kid of the goats for a sin offering, to make an
atonement for you: 29:6 Beside the burnt offering of the month, and
his meat offering, and the daily burnt offering, and his meat
offering, and their drink offerings, according unto their manner, for
a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD.

29:7 And ye shall have on the tenth day of this seventh month an holy
convocation; and ye shall afflict your souls: ye shall not do any work
therein: 29:8 But ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the LORD for a
sweet savour; one young bullock, one ram, and seven lambs of the first
year; they shall be unto you without blemish: 29:9 And their meat
offering shall be of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals to a
bullock, and two tenth deals to one ram, 29:10 A several tenth deal
for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs: 29:11 One kid of the goats
for a sin offering; beside the sin offering of atonement, and the
continual burnt offering, and the meat offering of it, and their drink
offerings.

29:12 And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have an
holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work, and ye shall keep a
feast unto the LORD seven days: 29:13 And ye shall offer a burnt
offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD;
thirteen young bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first
year; they shall be without blemish: 29:14 And their meat offering
shall be of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals unto every
bullock of the thirteen bullocks, two tenth deals to each ram of the
two rams, 29:15 And a several tenth deal to each lamb of the fourteen
lambs: 29:16 And one kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the
continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:17 And on the second day ye shall offer twelve young bullocks, two
rams, fourteen lambs of the first year without spot: 29:18 And their
meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the
rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the
manner: 29:19 And one kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the
continual burnt offering, and the meat offering thereof, and their
drink offerings.

29:20 And on the third day eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs
of the first year without blemish; 29:21 And their meat offering and
their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner: 29:22 And
one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and
his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:23 And on the fourth day ten bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs
of the first year without blemish: 29:24 Their meat offering and their
drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs,
shall be according to their number, after the manner: 29:25 And one
kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt
offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:26 And on the fifth day nine bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs
of the first year without spot: 29:27 And their meat offering and
their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner: 29:28 And
one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and
his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:29 And on the sixth day eight bullocks, two rams, and fourteen
lambs of the first year without blemish: 29:30 And their meat offering
and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner: 29:31 And
one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his
meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:32 And on the seventh day seven bullocks, two rams, and fourteen
lambs of the first year without blemish: 29:33 And their meat offering
and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner: 29:34 And
one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his
meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:35 On the eighth day ye shall have a solemn assembly: ye shall do
no servile work therein: 29:36 But ye shall offer a burnt offering, a
sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD: one bullock,
one ram, seven lambs of the first year without blemish: 29:37 Their
meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullock, for the ram,
and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the
manner: 29:38 And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual
burnt offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:39 These things ye shall do unto the LORD in your set feasts,
beside your vows, and your freewill offerings, for your burnt
offerings, and for your meat offerings, and for your drink offerings,
and for your peace offerings.

29:40 And Moses told the children of Israel according to all that the
LORD commanded Moses.

30:1 And Moses spake unto the heads of the tribes concerning the
children of Israel, saying, This is the thing which the LORD hath
commanded.

30:2 If a man vow a vow unto the LORD, or swear an oath to bind his
soul with a bond; he shall not break his word, he shall do according
to all that proceedeth out of his mouth.

30:3 If a woman also vow a vow unto the LORD, and bind herself by a
bond, being in her father's house in her youth; 30:4 And her father
hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bound her soul, and her
father shall hold his peace at her; then all her vows shall stand, and
every bond wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand.

30:5 But if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth; not
any of her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she hath bound her soul,
shall stand: and the LORD shall forgive her, because her father
disallowed her.

30:6 And if she had at all an husband, when she vowed, or uttered
ought out of her lips, wherewith she bound her soul; 30:7 And her
husband heard it, and held his peace at her in the day that he heard
it: then her vows shall stand, and her bonds wherewith she bound her
soul shall stand.

30:8 But if her husband disallowed her on the day that he heard it;
then he shall make her vow which she vowed, and that which she uttered
with her lips, wherewith she bound her soul, of none effect: and the
LORD shall forgive her.

30:9 But every vow of a widow, and of her that is divorced, wherewith
they have bound their souls, shall stand against her.

30:10 And if she vowed in her husband's house, or bound her soul by a
bond with an oath; 30:11 And her husband heard it, and held his peace
at her, and disallowed her not: then all her vows shall stand, and
every bond wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.

30:12 But if her husband hath utterly made them void on the day he
heard them; then whatsoever proceeded out of her lips concerning her
vows, or concerning the bond of her soul, shall not stand: her husband
hath made them void; and the LORD shall forgive her.
