
30:13 Every vow, and every binding oath to afflict the soul, her
husband may establish it, or her husband may make it void.

30:14 But if her husband altogether hold his peace at her from day to
day; then he establisheth all her vows, or all her bonds, which are
upon her: he confirmeth them, because he held his peace at her in the
day that he heard them.

30:15 But if he shall any ways make them void after that he hath heard
them; then he shall bear her iniquity.

30:16 These are the statutes, which the LORD commanded Moses, between
a man and his wife, between the father and his daughter, being yet in
her youth in her father's house.

31:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 31:2 Avenge the children
of Israel of the Midianites: afterward shalt thou be gathered unto thy
people.

31:3 And Moses spake unto the people, saying, Arm some of yourselves
unto the war, and let them go against the Midianites, and avenge the
LORD of Midian.

31:4 Of every tribe a thousand, throughout all the tribes of Israel,
shall ye send to the war.

31:5 So there were delivered out of the thousands of Israel, a
thousand of every tribe, twelve thousand armed for war.

31:6 And Moses sent them to the war, a thousand of every tribe, them
and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to the war, with the holy
instruments, and the trumpets to blow in his hand.

31:7 And they warred against the Midianites, as the LORD commanded
Moses; and they slew all the males.

31:8 And they slew the kings of Midian, beside the rest of them that
were slain; namely, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, five
kings of Midian: Balaam also the son of Beor they slew with the sword.

31:9 And the children of Israel took all the women of Midian captives,
and their little ones, and took the spoil of all their cattle, and all
their flocks, and all their goods.

31:10 And they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, and all
their goodly castles, with fire.

31:11 And they took all the spoil, and all the prey, both of men and
of beasts.

31:12 And they brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, unto
Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and unto the congregation of the
children of Israel, unto the camp at the plains of Moab, which are by
Jordan near Jericho.

31:13 And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the
congregation, went forth to meet them without the camp.

31:14 And Moses was wroth with the officers of the host, with the
captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, which came from
the battle.

31:15 And Moses said unto them, Have ye saved all the women alive?
31:16 Behold, these caused the children of Israel, through the counsel
of Balaam, to commit trespass against the LORD in the matter of Peor,
and there was a plague among the congregation of the LORD.

31:17 Now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill
every woman that hath known man by lying with him.

31:18 But all the women children, that have not known a man by lying
with him, keep alive for yourselves.

31:19 And do ye abide without the camp seven days: whosoever hath
killed any person, and whosoever hath touched any slain, purify both
yourselves and your captives on the third day, and on the seventh day.

31:20 And purify all your raiment, and all that is made of skins, and
all work of goats' hair, and all things made of wood.

31:21 And Eleazar the priest said unto the men of war which went to
the battle, This is the ordinance of the law which the LORD commanded
Moses; 31:22 Only the gold, and the silver, the brass, the iron, the
tin, and the lead, 31:23 Every thing that may abide the fire, ye shall
make it go through the fire, and it shall be clean: nevertheless it
shall be purified with the water of separation: and all that abideth
not the fire ye shall make go through the water.

31:24 And ye shall wash your clothes on the seventh day, and ye shall
be clean, and afterward ye shall come into the camp.

31:25 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 31:26 Take the sum of the
prey that was taken, both of man and of beast, thou, and Eleazar the
priest, and the chief fathers of the congregation: 31:27 And divide
the prey into two parts; between them that took the war upon them, who
went out to battle, and between all the congregation: 31:28 And levy a
tribute unto the Lord of the men of war which went out to battle: one
soul of five hundred, both of the persons, and of the beeves, and of
the asses, and of the sheep: 31:29 Take it of their half, and give it
unto Eleazar the priest, for an heave offering of the LORD.

31:30 And of the children of Israel's half, thou shalt take one
portion of fifty, of the persons, of the beeves, of the asses, and of
the flocks, of all manner of beasts, and give them unto the Levites,
which keep the charge of the tabernacle of the LORD.

31:31 And Moses and Eleazar the priest did as the LORD commanded
Moses.

31:32 And the booty, being the rest of the prey which the men of war
had caught, was six hundred thousand and seventy thousand and five
thousand sheep, 31:33 And threescore and twelve thousand beeves, 31:34
And threescore and one thousand asses, 31:35 And thirty and two
thousand persons in all, of women that had not known man by lying with
him.

31:36 And the half, which was the portion of them that went out to
war, was in number three hundred thousand and seven and thirty
thousand and five hundred sheep: 31:37 And the LORD's tribute of the
sheep was six hundred and threescore and fifteen.

31:38 And the beeves were thirty and six thousand; of which the LORD's
tribute was threescore and twelve.

31:39 And the asses were thirty thousand and five hundred; of which
the LORD's tribute was threescore and one.

31:40 And the persons were sixteen thousand; of which the LORD's
tribute was thirty and two persons.

31:41 And Moses gave the tribute, which was the LORD's heave offering,
unto Eleazar the priest, as the LORD commanded Moses.

31:42 And of the children of Israel's half, which Moses divided from
the men that warred, 31:43 (Now the half that pertained unto the
congregation was three hundred thousand and thirty thousand and seven
thousand and five hundred sheep, 31:44 And thirty and six thousand
beeves, 31:45 And thirty thousand asses and five hundred, 31:46 And
sixteen thousand persons;) 31:47 Even of the children of Israel's
half, Moses took one portion of fifty, both of man and of beast, and
gave them unto the Levites, which kept the charge of the tabernacle of
the LORD; as the LORD commanded Moses.

31:48 And the officers which were over thousands of the host, the
captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds, came near unto Moses:
31:49 And they said unto Moses, Thy servants have taken the sum of the
men of war which are under our charge, and there lacketh not one man
of us.

31:50 We have therefore brought an oblation for the LORD, what every
man hath gotten, of jewels of gold, chains, and bracelets, rings,
earrings, and tablets, to make an atonement for our souls before the
LORD.

31:51 And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of them, even all
wrought jewels.

31:52 And all the gold of the offering that they offered up to the
LORD, of the captains of thousands, and of the captains of hundreds,
was sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels.

31:53 (For the men of war had taken spoil, every man for himself.)
31:54 And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains
of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into the tabernacle of
the congregation, for a memorial for the children of Israel before the
LORD.

32:1 Now the children of Reuben and the children of Gad had a very
great multitude of cattle: and when they saw the land of Jazer, and
the land of Gilead, that, behold, the place was a place for cattle;
32:2 The children of Gad and the children of Reuben came and spake
unto Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, and unto the princes of the
congregation, saying, 32:3 Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah,
and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Shebam, and Nebo, and Beon, 32:4 Even
the country which the LORD smote before the congregation of Israel, is
a land for cattle, and thy servants have cattle: 32:5 Wherefore, said
they, if we have found grace in thy sight, let this land be given unto
thy servants for a possession, and bring us not over Jordan.

32:6 And Moses said unto the children of Gad and to the children of
Reuben, Shall your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here?  32:7
And wherefore discourage ye the heart of the children of Israel from
going over into the land which the LORD hath given them?  32:8 Thus
did your fathers, when I sent them from Kadeshbarnea to see the land.

32:9 For when they went up unto the valley of Eshcol, and saw the
land, they discouraged the heart of the children of Israel, that they
should not go into the land which the LORD had given them.

32:10 And the LORD's anger was kindled the same time, and he sware,
saying, 32:11 Surely none of the men that came up out of Egypt, from
twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which I sware unto
Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob; because they have not wholly
followed me: 32:12 Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite, and
Joshua the son of Nun: for they have wholly followed the LORD.

32:13 And the LORD's anger was kindled against Israel, and he made
them wander in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation,
that had done evil in the sight of the LORD, was consumed.

32:14 And, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, an increase
of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the LORD toward
Israel.

32:15 For if ye turn away from after him, he will yet again leave them
in the wilderness; and ye shall destroy all this people.

32:16 And they came near unto him, and said, We will build sheepfolds
here for our cattle, and cities for our little ones: 32:17 But we
ourselves will go ready armed before the children of Israel, until we
have brought them unto their place: and our little ones shall dwell in
the fenced cities because of the inhabitants of the land.

32:18 We will not return unto our houses, until the children of Israel
have inherited every man his inheritance.

32:19 For we will not inherit with them on yonder side Jordan, or
forward; because our inheritance is fallen to us on this side Jordan
eastward.

32:20 And Moses said unto them, If ye will do this thing, if ye will
go armed before the LORD to war, 32:21 And will go all of you armed
over Jordan before the LORD, until he hath driven out his enemies from
before him, 32:22 And the land be subdued before the LORD: then
afterward ye shall return, and be guiltless before the LORD, and
before Israel; and this land shall be your possession before the LORD.

32:23 But if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the
LORD: and be sure your sin will find you out.

32:24 Build you cities for your little ones, and folds for your sheep;
and do that which hath proceeded out of your mouth.

32:25 And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben spake unto
Moses, saying, Thy servants will do as my lord commandeth.

32:26 Our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle,
shall be there in the cities of Gilead: 32:27 But thy servants will
pass over, every man armed for war, before the LORD to battle, as my
lord saith.

32:28 So concerning them Moses commanded Eleazar the priest, and
Joshua the son of Nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes of the
children of Israel: 32:29 And Moses said unto them, If the children of
Gad and the children of Reuben will pass with you over Jordan, every
man armed to battle, before the LORD, and the land shall be subdued
before you; then ye shall give them the land of Gilead for a
possession: 32:30 But if they will not pass over with you armed, they
shall have possessions among you in the land of Canaan.

32:31 And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben answered,
saying, As the LORD hath said unto thy servants, so will we do.

32:32 We will pass over armed before the LORD into the land of Canaan,
that the possession of our inheritance on this side Jordan may be
ours.

32:33 And Moses gave unto them, even to the children of Gad, and to
the children of Reuben, and unto half the tribe of Manasseh the son of
Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, and the kingdom of
Og king of Bashan, the land, with the cities thereof in the coasts,
even the cities of the country round about.

32:34 And the children of Gad built Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer,
32:35 And Atroth, Shophan, and Jaazer, and Jogbehah, 32:36 And
Bethnimrah, and Bethharan, fenced cities: and folds for sheep.

32:37 And the children of Reuben built Heshbon, and Elealeh, and
Kirjathaim, 32:38 And Nebo, and Baalmeon, (their names being changed,)
and Shibmah: and gave other names unto the cities which they builded.

32:39 And the children of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead,
and took it, and dispossessed the Amorite which was in it.

32:40 And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manasseh; and he
dwelt therein.

32:41 And Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the small towns
thereof, and called them Havothjair.

32:42 And Nobah went and took Kenath, and the villages thereof, and
called it Nobah, after his own name.

33:1 These are the journeys of the children of Israel, which went
forth out of the land of Egypt with their armies under the hand of
Moses and Aaron.

33:2 And Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys by
the commandment of the LORD: and these are their journeys according to
their goings out.

33:3 And they departed from Rameses in the first month, on the
fifteenth day of the first month; on the morrow after the passover the
children of Israel went out with an high hand in the sight of all the
Egyptians.

33:4 For the Egyptians buried all their firstborn, which the LORD had
smitten among them: upon their gods also the LORD executed judgments.

33:5 And the children of Israel removed from Rameses, and pitched in
Succoth.

33:6 And they departed from Succoth, and pitched in Etham, which is in
the edge of the wilderness.

33:7 And they removed from Etham, and turned again unto Pihahiroth,
which is before Baalzephon: and they pitched before Migdol.

33:8 And they departed from before Pihahiroth, and passed through the
midst of the sea into the wilderness, and went three days' journey in
the wilderness of Etham, and pitched in Marah.

33:9 And they removed from Marah, and came unto Elim: and in Elim were
twelve fountains of water, and threescore and ten palm trees; and they
pitched there.

33:10 And they removed from Elim, and encamped by the Red sea.

33:11 And they removed from the Red sea, and encamped in the
wilderness of Sin.

33:12 And they took their journey out of the wilderness of Sin, and
encamped in Dophkah.

33:13 And they departed from Dophkah, and encamped in Alush.

33:14 And they removed from Alush, and encamped at Rephidim, where was
no water for the people to drink.

33:15 And they departed from Rephidim, and pitched in the wilderness
of Sinai.

33:16 And they removed from the desert of Sinai, and pitched at
Kibrothhattaavah.

33:17 And they departed from Kibrothhattaavah, and encamped at
Hazeroth.

33:18 And they departed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithmah.

33:19 And they departed from Rithmah, and pitched at Rimmonparez.

33:20 And they departed from Rimmonparez, and pitched in Libnah.

33:21 And they removed from Libnah, and pitched at Rissah.

33:22 And they journeyed from Rissah, and pitched in Kehelathah.

33:23 And they went from Kehelathah, and pitched in mount Shapher.

33:24 And they removed from mount Shapher, and encamped in Haradah.

33:25 And they removed from Haradah, and pitched in Makheloth.

33:26 And they removed from Makheloth, and encamped at Tahath.

33:27 And they departed from Tahath, and pitched at Tarah.

33:28 And they removed from Tarah, and pitched in Mithcah.

33:29 And they went from Mithcah, and pitched in Hashmonah.

33:30 And they departed from Hashmonah, and encamped at Moseroth.

33:31 And they departed from Moseroth, and pitched in Benejaakan.

33:32 And they removed from Benejaakan, and encamped at Horhagidgad.

33:33 And they went from Horhagidgad, and pitched in Jotbathah.

33:34 And they removed from Jotbathah, and encamped at Ebronah.

33:35 And they departed from Ebronah, and encamped at Eziongaber.

33:36 And they removed from Eziongaber, and pitched in the wilderness
of Zin, which is Kadesh.

33:37 And they removed from Kadesh, and pitched in mount Hor, in the
edge of the land of Edom.

33:38 And Aaron the priest went up into mount Hor at the commandment
of the LORD, and died there, in the fortieth year after the children
of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the first day of the
fifth month.

33:39 And Aaron was an hundred and twenty and three years old when he
died in mount Hor.

33:40 And king Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south in the
land of Canaan, heard of the coming of the children of Israel.

33:41 And they departed from mount Hor, and pitched in Zalmonah.

33:42 And they departed from Zalmonah, and pitched in Punon.

33:43 And they departed from Punon, and pitched in Oboth.

33:44 And they departed from Oboth, and pitched in Ijeabarim, in the
border of Moab.

33:45 And they departed from Iim, and pitched in Dibongad.

33:46 And they removed from Dibongad, and encamped in Almondiblathaim.

33:47 And they removed from Almondiblathaim, and pitched in the
mountains of Abarim, before Nebo.

33:48 And they departed from the mountains of Abarim, and pitched in
the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.

33:49 And they pitched by Jordan, from Bethjesimoth even unto
Abelshittim in the plains of Moab.

33:50 And the LORD spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan
near Jericho, saying, 33:51 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say
unto them, When ye are passed over Jordan into the land of Canaan;
33:52 Then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from
before you, and destroy all their pictures, and destroy all their
molten images, and quite pluck down all their high places: 33:53 And
ye shall dispossess the inhabitants of the land, and dwell therein:
for I have given you the land to possess it.

33:54 And ye shall divide the land by lot for an inheritance among
your families: and to the more ye shall give the more inheritance, and
to the fewer ye shall give the less inheritance: every man's
inheritance shall be in the place where his lot falleth; according to
the tribes of your fathers ye shall inherit.

33:55 But if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land from
before you; then it shall come to pass, that those which ye let remain
of them shall be pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your sides, and
shall vex you in the land wherein ye dwell.

33:56 Moreover it shall come to pass, that I shall do unto you, as I
thought to do unto them.

34:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 34:2 Command the children
of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land of Canaan;
(this is the land that shall fall unto you for an inheritance, even
the land of Canaan with the coasts thereof:) 34:3 Then your south
quarter shall be from the wilderness of Zin along by the coast of
Edom, and your south border shall be the outmost coast of the salt sea
eastward: 34:4 And your border shall turn from the south to the ascent
of Akrabbim, and pass on to Zin: and the going forth thereof shall be
from the south to Kadeshbarnea, and shall go on to Hazaraddar, and
pass on to Azmon: 34:5 And the border shall fetch a compass from Azmon
unto the river of Egypt, and the goings out of it shall be at the sea.

34:6 And as for the western border, ye shall even have the great sea
for a border: this shall be your west border.

34:7 And this shall be your north border: from the great sea ye shall
point out for you mount Hor: 34:8 From mount Hor ye shall point out
your border unto the entrance of Hamath; and the goings forth of the
border shall be to Zedad: 34:9 And the border shall go on to Ziphron,
and the goings out of it shall be at Hazarenan: this shall be your
north border.

34:10 And ye shall point out your east border from Hazarenan to
Shepham: 34:11 And the coast shall go down from Shepham to Riblah, on
the east side of Ain; and the border shall descend, and shall reach
unto the side of the sea of Chinnereth eastward: 34:12 And the border
shall go down to Jordan, and the goings out of it shall be at the salt
sea: this shall be your land with the coasts thereof round about.

34:13 And Moses commanded the children of Israel, saying, This is the
land which ye shall inherit by lot, which the LORD commanded to give
unto the nine tribes, and to the half tribe: 34:14 For the tribe of
the children of Reuben according to the house of their fathers, and
the tribe of the children of Gad according to the house of their
fathers, have received their inheritance; and half the tribe of
Manasseh have received their inheritance: 34:15 The two tribes and the
half tribe have received their inheritance on this side Jordan near
Jericho eastward, toward the sunrising.

34:16 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 34:17 These are the names
of the men which shall divide the land unto you: Eleazar the priest,
and Joshua the son of Nun.

34:18 And ye shall take one prince of every tribe, to divide the land
by inheritance.

34:19 And the names of the men are these: Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb
the son of Jephunneh.

34:20 And of the tribe of the children of Simeon, Shemuel the son of
Ammihud.

34:21 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon.

34:22 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Dan, Bukki the
son of Jogli.

34:23 The prince of the children of Joseph, for the tribe of the
children of Manasseh, Hanniel the son of Ephod.

34:24 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Ephraim, Kemuel
the son of Shiphtan.

34:25 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Zebulun,
Elizaphan the son of Parnach.

34:26 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Issachar, Paltiel
the son of Azzan.

34:27 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Asher, Ahihud the
son of Shelomi.

34:28 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Naphtali, Pedahel
the son of Ammihud.

34:29 These are they whom the LORD commanded to divide the inheritance
unto the children of Israel in the land of Canaan.

35:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan
near Jericho, saying, 35:2 Command the children of Israel, that they
give unto the Levites of the inheritance of their possession cities to
dwell in; and ye shall give also unto the Levites suburbs for the
cities round about them.

35:3 And the cities shall they have to dwell in; and the suburbs of
them shall be for their cattle, and for their goods, and for all their
beasts.

35:4 And the suburbs of the cities, which ye shall give unto the
Levites, shall reach from the wall of the city and outward a thousand
cubits round about.

35:5 And ye shall measure from without the city on the east side two
thousand cubits, and on the south side two thousand cubits, and on the
west side two thousand cubits, and on the north side two thousand
cubits; and the city shall be in the midst: this shall be to them the
suburbs of the cities.

35:6 And among the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites there
shall be six cities for refuge, which ye shall appoint for the
manslayer, that he may flee thither: and to them ye shall add forty
and two cities.

35:7 So all the cities which ye shall give to the Levites shall be
forty and eight cities: them shall ye give with their suburbs.

35:8 And the cities which ye shall give shall be of the possession of
the children of Israel: from them that have many ye shall give many;
but from them that have few ye shall give few: every one shall give of
his cities unto the Levites according to his inheritance which he
inheriteth.

35:9 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 35:10 Speak unto the
children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come over Jordan
into the land of Canaan; 35:11 Then ye shall appoint you cities to be
cities of refuge for you; that the slayer may flee thither, which
killeth any person at unawares.

35:12 And they shall be unto you cities for refuge from the avenger;
that the manslayer die not, until he stand before the congregation in
judgment.

35:13 And of these cities which ye shall give six cities shall ye have
for refuge.

35:14 Ye shall give three cities on this side Jordan, and three cities
shall ye give in the land of Canaan, which shall be cities of refuge.

35:15 These six cities shall be a refuge, both for the children of
Israel, and for the stranger, and for the sojourner among them: that
every one that killeth any person unawares may flee thither.

35:16 And if he smite him with an instrument of iron, so that he die,
he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.

35:17 And if he smite him with throwing a stone, wherewith he may die,
and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to
death.

35:18 Or if he smite him with an hand weapon of wood, wherewith he may
die, and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to
death.

35:19 The revenger of blood himself shall slay the murderer: when he
meeteth him, he shall slay him.

35:20 But if he thrust him of hatred, or hurl at him by laying of
wait, that he die; 35:21 Or in enmity smite him with his hand, that he
die: he that smote him shall surely be put to death; for he is a
murderer: the revenger of blood shall slay the murderer, when he
meeteth him.

35:22 But if he thrust him suddenly without enmity, or have cast upon
him any thing without laying of wait, 35:23 Or with any stone,
wherewith a man may die, seeing him not, and cast it upon him, that he
die, and was not his enemy, neither sought his harm: 35:24 Then the
congregation shall judge between the slayer and the revenger of blood
according to these judgments: 35:25 And the congregation shall deliver
the slayer out of the hand of the revenger of blood, and the
congregation shall restore him to the city of his refuge, whither he
was fled: and he shall abide in it unto the death of the high priest,
which was anointed with the holy oil.

35:26 But if the slayer shall at any time come without the border of
the city of his refuge, whither he was fled; 35:27 And the revenger of
blood find him without the borders of the city of his refuge, and the
revenger of blood kill the slayer; he shall not be guilty of blood:
35:28 Because he should have remained in the city of his refuge until
the death of the high priest: but after the death of the high priest
the slayer shall return into the land of his possession.

35:29 So these things shall be for a statute of judgment unto you
throughout your generations in all your dwellings.

35:30 Whoso killeth any person, the murderer shall be put to death by
the mouth of witnesses: but one witness shall not testify against any
person to cause him to die.

35:31 Moreover ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a
murderer, which is guilty of death: but he shall be surely put to
death.

35:32 And ye shall take no satisfaction for him that is fled to the
city of his refuge, that he should come again to dwell in the land,
until the death of the priest.

35:33 So ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are: for blood it
defileth the land: and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that
is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.

35:34 Defile not therefore the land which ye shall inhabit, wherein I
dwell: for I the LORD dwell among the children of Israel.

36:1 And the chief fathers of the families of the children of Gilead,
the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of the sons of
Joseph, came near, and spake before Moses, and before the princes, the
chief fathers of the children of Israel: 36:2 And they said, The LORD
commanded my lord to give the land for an inheritance by lot to the
children of Israel: and my lord was commanded by the LORD to give the
inheritance of Zelophehad our brother unto his daughters.

36:3 And if they be married to any of the sons of the other tribes of
the children of Israel, then shall their inheritance be taken from the
inheritance of our fathers, and shall be put to the inheritance of the
tribe whereunto they are received: so shall it be taken from the lot
of our inheritance.

36:4 And when the jubile of the children of Israel shall be, then
shall their inheritance be put unto the inheritance of the tribe
whereunto they are received: so shall their inheritance be taken away
from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.

36:5 And Moses commanded the children of Israel according to the word
of the LORD, saying, The tribe of the sons of Joseph hath said well.

36:6 This is the thing which the LORD doth command concerning the
daughters of Zelophehad, saying, Let them marry to whom they think
best; only to the family of the tribe of their father shall they
marry.

36:7 So shall not the inheritance of the children of Israel remove
from tribe to tribe: for every one of the children of Israel shall
keep himself to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.

36:8 And every daughter, that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe
of the children of Israel, shall be wife unto one of the family of the
tribe of her father, that the children of Israel may enjoy every man
the inheritance of his fathers.

36:9 Neither shall the inheritance remove from one tribe to another
tribe; but every one of the tribes of the children of Israel shall
keep himself to his own inheritance.

36:10 Even as the LORD commanded Moses, so did the daughters of
Zelophehad: 36:11 For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and
Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, were married unto their father's
brothers' sons: 36:12 And they were married into the families of the
sons of Manasseh the son of Joseph, and their inheritance remained in
the tribe of the family of their father.

36:13 These are the commandments and the judgments, which the LORD
commanded by the hand of Moses unto the children of Israel in the
plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.




The Fifth Book of Moses:  Called Deuteronomy


1:1 These be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel on this side
Jordan in the wilderness, in the plain over against the Red sea,
between Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and Dizahab.

1:2 (There are eleven days' journey from Horeb by the way of mount
Seir unto Kadeshbarnea.)  1:3 And it came to pass in the fortieth
year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that Moses
spake unto the children of Israel, according unto all that the LORD
had given him in commandment unto them; 1:4 After he had slain Sihon
the king of the Amorites, which dwelt in Heshbon, and Og the king of
Bashan, which dwelt at Astaroth in Edrei: 1:5 On this side Jordan, in
the land of Moab, began Moses to declare this law, saying, 1:6 The
LORD our God spake unto us in Horeb, saying, Ye have dwelt long enough
in this mount: 1:7 Turn you, and take your journey, and go to the
mount of the Amorites, and unto all the places nigh thereunto, in the
plain, in the hills, and in the vale, and in the south, and by the sea
side, to the land of the Canaanites, and unto Lebanon, unto the great
river, the river Euphrates.

1:8 Behold, I have set the land before you: go in and possess the land
which the LORD sware unto your fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to
give unto them and to their seed after them.

1:9 And I spake unto you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear
you myself alone: 1:10 The LORD your God hath multiplied you, and,
behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.

1:11 (The LORD God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many
more as ye are, and bless you, as he hath promised you!)  1:12 How can
I myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?
1:13 Take you wise men, and understanding, and known among your
tribes, and I will make them rulers over you.

1:14 And ye answered me, and said, The thing which thou hast spoken is
good for us to do.

1:15 So I took the chief of your tribes, wise men, and known, and made
them heads over you, captains over thousands, and captains over
hundreds, and captains over fifties, and captains over tens, and
officers among your tribes.

1:16 And I charged your judges at that time, saying, Hear the causes
between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his
brother, and the stranger that is with him.

1:17 Ye shall not respect persons in judgment; but ye shall hear the
small as well as the great; ye shall not be afraid of the face of man;
for the judgment is God's: and the cause that is too hard for you,
bring it unto me, and I will hear it.

1:18 And I commanded you at that time all the things which ye should
do.

1:19 And when we departed from Horeb, we went through all that great
and terrible wilderness, which ye saw by the way of the mountain of
the Amorites, as the LORD our God commanded us; and we came to
Kadeshbarnea.

1:20 And I said unto you, Ye are come unto the mountain of the
Amorites, which the LORD our God doth give unto us.

1:21 Behold, the LORD thy God hath set the land before thee: go up and
possess it, as the LORD God of thy fathers hath said unto thee; fear
not, neither be discouraged.

1:22 And ye came near unto me every one of you, and said, We will send
men before us, and they shall search us out the land, and bring us
word again by what way we must go up, and into what cities we shall
come.

1:23 And the saying pleased me well: and I took twelve men of you, one
of a tribe: 1:24 And they turned and went up into the mountain, and
came unto the valley of Eshcol, and searched it out.

1:25 And they took of the fruit of the land in their hands, and
brought it down unto us, and brought us word again, and said, It is a
good land which the LORD our God doth give us.

1:26 Notwithstanding ye would not go up, but rebelled against the
commandment of the LORD your God: 1:27 And ye murmured in your tents,
and said, Because the LORD hated us, he hath brought us forth out of
the land of Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to
destroy us.

1:28 Whither shall we go up? our brethren have discouraged our heart,
saying, The people is greater and taller than we; the cities are great
and walled up to heaven; and moreover we have seen the sons of the
Anakims there.

1:29 Then I said unto you, Dread not, neither be afraid of them.

1:30 The LORD your God which goeth before you, he shall fight for you,
according to all that he did for you in Egypt before your eyes; 1:31
And in the wilderness, where thou hast seen how that the LORD thy God
bare thee, as a man doth bear his son, in all the way that ye went,
until ye came into this place.

1:32 Yet in this thing ye did not believe the LORD your God, 1:33 Who
went in the way before you, to search you out a place to pitch your
tents in, in fire by night, to shew you by what way ye should go, and
in a cloud by day.

1:34 And the LORD heard the voice of your words, and was wroth, and
sware, saying, 1:35 Surely there shall not one of these men of this
evil generation see that good land, which I sware to give unto your
fathers.

1:36 Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh; he shall see it, and to him will
I give the land that he hath trodden upon, and to his children,
because he hath wholly followed the LORD.

1:37 Also the LORD was angry with me for your sakes, saying, Thou also
shalt not go in thither.

1:38 But Joshua the son of Nun, which standeth before thee, he shall
go in thither: encourage him: for he shall cause Israel to inherit it.

1:39 Moreover your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, and
your children, which in that day had no knowledge between good and
evil, they shall go in thither, and unto them will I give it, and they
shall possess it.

1:40 But as for you, turn you, and take your journey into the
wilderness by the way of the Red sea.

1:41 Then ye answered and said unto me, We have sinned against the
LORD, we will go up and fight, according to all that the LORD our God
commanded us.

And when ye had girded on every man his weapons of war, ye were ready
to go up into the hill.

1:42 And the LORD said unto me, Say unto them. Go not up, neither
fight; for I am not among you; lest ye be smitten before your enemies.

1:43 So I spake unto you; and ye would not hear, but rebelled against
the commandment of the LORD, and went presumptuously up into the hill.

1:44 And the Amorites, which dwelt in that mountain, came out against
you, and chased you, as bees do, and destroyed you in Seir, even unto
Hormah.

1:45 And ye returned and wept before the LORD; but the LORD would not
hearken to your voice, nor give ear unto you.

1:46 So ye abode in Kadesh many days, according unto the days that ye
abode there.

2:1 Then we turned, and took our journey into the wilderness by the
way of the Red sea, as the LORD spake unto me: and we compassed mount
Seir many days.

2:2 And the LORD spake unto me, saying, 2:3 Ye have compassed this
mountain long enough: turn you northward.

2:4 And command thou the people, saying, Ye are to pass through the
coast of your brethren the children of Esau, which dwell in Seir; and
they shall be afraid of you: take ye good heed unto yourselves
therefore: 2:5 Meddle not with them; for I will not give you of their
land, no, not so much as a foot breadth; because I have given mount
Seir unto Esau for a possession.

2:6 Ye shall buy meat of them for money, that ye may eat; and ye shall
also buy water of them for money, that ye may drink.

2:7 For the LORD thy God hath blessed thee in all the works of thy
hand: he knoweth thy walking through this great wilderness: these
forty years the LORD thy God hath been with thee; thou hast lacked
nothing.

2:8 And when we passed by from our brethren the children of Esau,
which dwelt in Seir, through the way of the plain from Elath, and from
Eziongaber, we turned and passed by the way of the wilderness of Moab.

2:9 And the LORD said unto me, Distress not the Moabites, neither
contend with them in battle: for I will not give thee of their land
for a possession; because I have given Ar unto the children of Lot for
a possession.

2:10 The Emims dwelt therein in times past, a people great, and many,
and tall, as the Anakims; 2:11 Which also were accounted giants, as
the Anakims; but the Moabites called them Emims.

2:12 The Horims also dwelt in Seir beforetime; but the children of
Esau succeeded them, when they had destroyed them from before them,
and dwelt in their stead; as Israel did unto the land of his
possession, which the LORD gave unto them.

2:13 Now rise up, said I, and get you over the brook Zered. And we
went over the brook Zered.

2:14 And the space in which we came from Kadeshbarnea, until we were
come over the brook Zered, was thirty and eight years; until all the
generation of the men of war were wasted out from among the host, as
the LORD sware unto them.

2:15 For indeed the hand of the LORD was against them, to destroy them
from among the host, until they were consumed.

2:16 So it came to pass, when all the men of war were consumed and
dead from among the people, 2:17 That the LORD spake unto me, saying,
2:18 Thou art to pass over through Ar, the coast of Moab, this day:
2:19 And when thou comest nigh over against the children of Ammon,
distress them not, nor meddle with them: for I will not give thee of
the land of the children of Ammon any possession; because I have given
it unto the children of Lot for a possession.

2:20 (That also was accounted a land of giants: giants dwelt therein
in old time; and the Ammonites call them Zamzummims; 2:21 A people
great, and many, and tall, as the Anakims; but the LORD destroyed them
before them; and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead: 2:22
As he did to the children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir, when he
destroyed the Horims from before them; and they succeeded them, and
dwelt in their stead even unto this day: 2:23 And the Avims which
dwelt in Hazerim, even unto Azzah, the Caphtorims, which came forth
out of Caphtor, destroyed them, and dwelt in their stead.)  2:24 Rise
ye up, take your journey, and pass over the river Arnon: behold, I
have given into thine hand Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his
land: begin to possess it, and contend with him in battle.

2:25 This day will I begin to put the dread of thee and the fear of
thee upon the nations that are under the whole heaven, who shall hear
report of thee, and shall tremble, and be in anguish because of thee.

2:26 And I sent messengers out of the wilderness of Kedemoth unto
Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace, saying, 2:27 Let me pass
through thy land: I will go along by the high way, I will neither turn
unto the right hand nor to the left.

2:28 Thou shalt sell me meat for money, that I may eat; and give me
water for money, that I may drink: only I will pass through on my
feet; 2:29 (As the children of Esau which dwell in Seir, and the
Moabites which dwell in Ar, did unto me;) until I shall pass over
Jordan into the land which the LORD our God giveth us.

2:30 But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him: for the
LORD thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that
he might deliver him into thy hand, as appeareth this day.

2:31 And the LORD said unto me, Behold, I have begun to give Sihon and
his land before thee: begin to possess, that thou mayest inherit his
land.

2:32 Then Sihon came out against us, he and all his people, to fight
at Jahaz.

2:33 And the LORD our God delivered him before us; and we smote him,
and his sons, and all his people.

2:34 And we took all his cities at that time, and utterly destroyed
the men, and the women, and the little ones, of every city, we left
none to remain: 2:35 Only the cattle we took for a prey unto
ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we took.

2:36 From Aroer, which is by the brink of the river of Arnon, and from
the city that is by the river, even unto Gilead, there was not one
city too strong for us: the LORD our God delivered all unto us: 2:37
Only unto the land of the children of Ammon thou camest not, nor unto
any place of the river Jabbok, nor unto the cities in the mountains,
nor unto whatsoever the LORD our God forbad us.

3:1 Then we turned, and went up the way to Bashan: and Og the king of
Bashan came out against us, he and all his people, to battle at Edrei.

3:2 And the LORD said unto me, Fear him not: for I will deliver him,
and all his people, and his land, into thy hand; and thou shalt do
unto him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at
Heshbon.

3:3 So the LORD our God delivered into our hands Og also, the king of
Bashan, and all his people: and we smote him until none was left to
him remaining.

3:4 And we took all his cities at that time, there was not a city
which we took not from them, threescore cities, all the region of
Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.

3:5 All these cities were fenced with high walls, gates, and bars;
beside unwalled towns a great many.

3:6 And we utterly destroyed them, as we did unto Sihon king of
Heshbon, utterly destroying the men, women, and children, of every
city.

3:7 But all the cattle, and the spoil of the cities, we took for a
prey to ourselves.

3:8 And we took at that time out of the hand of the two kings of the
Amorites the land that was on this side Jordan, from the river of
Arnon unto mount Hermon; 3:9 (Which Hermon the Sidonians call Sirion;
and the Amorites call it Shenir;) 3:10 All the cities of the plain,
and all Gilead, and all Bashan, unto Salchah and Edrei, cities of the
kingdom of Og in Bashan.

3:11 For only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants;
behold his bedstead was a bedstead of iron; is it not in Rabbath of
the children of Ammon? nine cubits was the length thereof, and four
cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man.

3:12 And this land, which we possessed at that time, from Aroer, which
is by the river Arnon, and half mount Gilead, and the cities thereof,
gave I unto the Reubenites and to the Gadites.

3:13 And the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan, being the kingdom of Og,
gave I unto the half tribe of Manasseh; all the region of Argob, with
all Bashan, which was called the land of giants.

3:14 Jair the son of Manasseh took all the country of Argob unto the
coasts of Geshuri and Maachathi; and called them after his own name,
Bashanhavothjair, unto this day.

3:15 And I gave Gilead unto Machir.

