3:16 And unto the Reubenites and unto the Gadites I gave from Gilead
even unto the river Arnon half the valley, and the border even unto
the river Jabbok, which is the border of the children of Ammon; 3:17
The plain also, and Jordan, and the coast thereof, from Chinnereth
even unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, under Ashdothpisgah
eastward.

3:18 And I commanded you at that time, saying, The LORD your God hath
given you this land to possess it: ye shall pass over armed before
your brethren the children of Israel, all that are meet for the war.

3:19 But your wives, and your little ones, and your cattle, (for I
know that ye have much cattle,) shall abide in your cities which I
have given you; 3:20 Until the LORD have given rest unto your
brethren, as well as unto you, and until they also possess the land
which the LORD your God hath given them beyond Jordan: and then shall
ye return every man unto his possession, which I have given you.

3:21 And I commanded Joshua at that time, saying, Thine eyes have seen
all that the LORD your God hath done unto these two kings: so shall
the LORD do unto all the kingdoms whither thou passest.

3:22 Ye shall not fear them: for the LORD your God he shall fight for
you.

3:23 And I besought the LORD at that time, saying, 3:24 O Lord GOD,
thou hast begun to shew thy servant thy greatness, and thy mighty
hand: for what God is there in heaven or in earth, that can do
according to thy works, and according to thy might?  3:25 I pray thee,
let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond Jordan, that
goodly mountain, and Lebanon.

3:26 But the LORD was wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear
me: and the LORD said unto me, Let it suffice thee; speak no more unto
me of this matter.

3:27 Get thee up into the top of Pisgah, and lift up thine eyes
westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and behold it
with thine eyes: for thou shalt not go over this Jordan.

3:28 But charge Joshua, and encourage him, and strengthen him: for he
shall go over before this people, and he shall cause them to inherit
the land which thou shalt see.

3:29 So we abode in the valley over against Bethpeor.

4:1 Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and unto the
judgments, which I teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and go
in and possess the land which the LORD God of your fathers giveth you.

4:2 Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall
ye diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the
LORD your God which I command you.

4:3 Your eyes have seen what the LORD did because of Baalpeor: for all
the men that followed Baalpeor, the LORD thy God hath destroyed them
from among you.

4:4 But ye that did cleave unto the LORD your God are alive every one
of you this day.

4:5 Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the LORD
my God commanded me, that ye should do so in the land whither ye go to
possess it.

4:6 Keep therefore and do them; for this is your wisdom and your
understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these
statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and
understanding people.

4:7 For what nation is there so great, who hath God so nigh unto them,
as the LORD our God is in all things that we call upon him for?  4:8
And what nation is there so great, that hath statutes and judgments so
righteous as all this law, which I set before you this day?  4:9 Only
take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget
the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy
heart all the days of thy life: but teach them thy sons, and thy sons'
sons; 4:10 Specially the day that thou stoodest before the LORD thy
God in Horeb, when the LORD said unto me, Gather me the people
together, and I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to
fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth, and that
they may teach their children.

4:11 And ye came near and stood under the mountain; and the mountain
burned with fire unto the midst of heaven, with darkness, clouds, and
thick darkness.

4:12 And the LORD spake unto you out of the midst of the fire: ye
heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude; only ye heard a
voice.

4:13 And he declared unto you his covenant, which he commanded you to
perform, even ten commandments; and he wrote them upon two tables of
stone.

4:14 And the LORD commanded me at that time to teach you statutes and
judgments, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go over to
possess it.

4:15 Take ye therefore good heed unto yourselves; for ye saw no manner
of similitude on the day that the LORD spake unto you in Horeb out of
the midst of the fire: 4:16 Lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make you a
graven image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or
female, 4:17 The likeness of any beast that is on the earth, the
likeness of any winged fowl that flieth in the air, 4:18 The likeness
of any thing that creepeth on the ground, the likeness of any fish
that is in the waters beneath the earth: 4:19 And lest thou lift up
thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and the moon, and
the stars, even all the host of heaven, shouldest be driven to worship
them, and serve them, which the LORD thy God hath divided unto all
nations under the whole heaven.

4:20 But the LORD hath taken you, and brought you forth out of the
iron furnace, even out of Egypt, to be unto him a people of
inheritance, as ye are this day.

4:21 Furthermore the LORD was angry with me for your sakes, and sware
that I should not go over Jordan, and that I should not go in unto
that good land, which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance:
4:22 But I must die in this land, I must not go over Jordan: but ye
shall go over, and possess that good land.

4:23 Take heed unto yourselves, lest ye forget the covenant of the
LORD your God, which he made with you, and make you a graven image, or
the likeness of any thing, which the LORD thy God hath forbidden thee.

4:24 For the LORD thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God.

4:25 When thou shalt beget children, and children's children, and ye
shall have remained long in the land, and shall corrupt yourselves,
and make a graven image, or the likeness of any thing, and shall do
evil in the sight of the LORD thy God, to provoke him to anger: 4:26 I
call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall
soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto ye go over Jordan to
possess it; ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall utterly
be destroyed.

4:27 And the LORD shall scatter you among the nations, and ye shall be
left few in number among the heathen, whither the LORD shall lead you.

4:28 And there ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands, wood and
stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.

4:29 But if from thence thou shalt seek the LORD thy God, thou shalt
find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart and with all thy soul.

4:30 When thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon
thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn to the LORD thy God, and
shalt be obedient unto his voice; 4:31 (For the LORD thy God is a
merciful God;) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor
forget the covenant of thy fathers which he sware unto them.

4:32 For ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee,
since the day that God created man upon the earth, and ask from the
one side of heaven unto the other, whether there hath been any such
thing as this great thing is, or hath been heard like it?  4:33 Did
ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the
fire, as thou hast heard, and live?  4:34 Or hath God assayed to go
and take him a nation from the midst of another nation, by
temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty
hand, and by a stretched out arm, and by great terrors, according to
all that the LORD your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes?
4:35 Unto thee it was shewed, that thou mightest know that the LORD he
is God; there is none else beside him.

4:36 Out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice, that he might
instruct thee: and upon earth he shewed thee his great fire; and thou
heardest his words out of the midst of the fire.

4:37 And because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed
after them, and brought thee out in his sight with his mighty power
out of Egypt; 4:38 To drive out nations from before thee greater and
mightier than thou art, to bring thee in, to give thee their land for
an inheritance, as it is this day.

4:39 Know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the
LORD he is God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath: there is
none else.

4:40 Thou shalt keep therefore his statutes, and his commandments,
which I command thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and with
thy children after thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days upon
the earth, which the LORD thy God giveth thee, for ever.

4:41 Then Moses severed three cities on this side Jordan toward the
sunrising; 4:42 That the slayer might flee thither, which should kill
his neighbour unawares, and hated him not in times past; and that
fleeing unto one of these cities he might live: 4:43 Namely, Bezer in
the wilderness, in the plain country, of the Reubenites; and Ramoth in
Gilead, of the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan, of the Manassites.

4:44 And this is the law which Moses set before the children of
Israel: 4:45 These are the testimonies, and the statutes, and the
judgments, which Moses spake unto the children of Israel, after they
came forth out of Egypt.

4:46 On this side Jordan, in the valley over against Bethpeor, in the
land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon, whom Moses
and the children of Israel smote, after they were come forth out of
Egypt: 4:47 And they possessed his land, and the land of Og king of
Bashan, two kings of the Amorites, which were on this side Jordan
toward the sunrising; 4:48 From Aroer, which is by the bank of the
river Arnon, even unto mount Sion, which is Hermon, 4:49 And all the
plain on this side Jordan eastward, even unto the sea of the plain,
under the springs of Pisgah.

5:1 And Moses called all Israel, and said unto them, Hear, O Israel,
the statutes and judgments which I speak in your ears this day, that
ye may learn them, and keep, and do them.

5:2 The LORD our God made a covenant with us in Horeb.

5:3 The LORD made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us,
even us, who are all of us here alive this day.

5:4 The LORD talked with you face to face in the mount out of the
midst of the fire, 5:5 (I stood between the LORD and you at that time,
to shew you the word of the LORD: for ye were afraid by reason of the
fire, and went not up into the mount;) saying, 5:6 I am the LORD thy
God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of
bondage.

5:7 Thou shalt have none other gods before me.

5:8 Thou shalt not make thee any graven image, or any likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or
that is in the waters beneath the earth: 5:9 Thou shalt not bow down
thyself unto them, nor serve them: for I the LORD thy God am a jealous
God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate me, 5:10 And shewing
mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments.

5:11 Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD thy God in vain: for the
LORD will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

5:12 Keep the sabbath day to sanctify it, as the LORD thy God hath
commanded thee.

5:13 Six days thou shalt labour, and do all thy work: 5:14 But the
seventh day is the sabbath of the LORD thy God: in it thou shalt not
do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant,
nor thy maidservant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy
cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates; that thy manservant
and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou.

5:15 And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and
that the LORD thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty hand
and by a stretched out arm: therefore the LORD thy God commanded thee
to keep the sabbath day.

5:16 Honour thy father and thy mother, as the LORD thy God hath
commanded thee; that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go
well with thee, in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

5:17 Thou shalt not kill.

5:18 Neither shalt thou commit adultery.

5:19 Neither shalt thou steal.

5:20 Neither shalt thou bear false witness against thy neighbour.

5:21 Neither shalt thou desire thy neighbour's wife, neither shalt
thou covet thy neighbour's house, his field, or his manservant, or his
maidservant, his ox, or his ass, or any thing that is thy neighbour's.

5:22 These words the LORD spake unto all your assembly in the mount
out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness,
with a great voice: and he added no more. And he wrote them in two
tables of stone, and delivered them unto me.

5:23 And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice out of the midst of
the darkness, (for the mountain did burn with fire,) that ye came near
unto me, even all the heads of your tribes, and your elders; 5:24 And
ye said, Behold, the LORD our God hath shewed us his glory and his
greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire:
we have seen this day that God doth talk with man, and he liveth.

5:25 Now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will consume
us: if we hear the voice of the LORD our God any more, then we shall
die.

5:26 For who is there of all flesh, that hath heard the voice of the
living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and
lived?  5:27 Go thou near, and hear all that the LORD our God shall
say: and speak thou unto us all that the LORD our God shall speak unto
thee; and we will hear it, and do it.

5:28 And the LORD heard the voice of your words, when ye spake unto
me; and the LORD said unto me, I have heard the voice of the words of
this people, which they have spoken unto thee: they have well said all
that they have spoken.

5:29 O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me,
and keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them,
and with their children for ever!  5:30 Go say to them, Get you into
your tents again.

5:31 But as for thee, stand thou here by me, and I will speak unto
thee all the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which
thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in the land which I give
them to possess it.

5:32 Ye shall observe to do therefore as the LORD your God hath
commanded you: ye shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the
left.

5:33 Ye shall walk in all the ways which the LORD your God hath
commanded you, that ye may live, and that it may be well with you, and
that ye may prolong your days in the land which ye shall possess.

6:1 Now these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments,
which the LORD your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do them
in the land whither ye go to possess it: 6:2 That thou mightest fear
the LORD thy God, to keep all his statutes and his commandments, which
I command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son's son, all the days of
thy life; and that thy days may be prolonged.

6:3 Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it; that it may be
well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as the LORD God of
thy fathers hath promised thee, in the land that floweth with milk and
honey.

6:4 Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God is one LORD: 6:5 And thou shalt
love the LORD thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy might.

6:6 And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine
heart: 6:7 And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and
shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou
walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

6:8 And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they
shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.

6:9 And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy
gates.

6:10 And it shall be, when the LORD thy God shall have brought thee
into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac,
and to Jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities, which thou
buildedst not, 6:11 And houses full of all good things, which thou
filledst not, and wells digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyards and
olive trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and
be full; 6:12 Then beware lest thou forget the LORD, which brought
thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.

6:13 Thou shalt fear the LORD thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear
by his name.

6:14 Ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods of the people which
are round about you; 6:15 (For the LORD thy God is a jealous God among
you) lest the anger of the LORD thy God be kindled against thee, and
destroy thee from off the face of the earth.

6:16 Ye shall not tempt the LORD your God, as ye tempted him in
Massah.

6:17 Ye shall diligently keep the commandments of the LORD your God,
and his testimonies, and his statutes, which he hath commanded thee.

6:18 And thou shalt do that which is right and good in the sight of
the LORD: that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest go in
and possess the good land which the LORD sware unto thy fathers.

6:19 To cast out all thine enemies from before thee, as the LORD hath
spoken.

6:20 And when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What mean
the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which the LORD
our God hath commanded you?  6:21 Then thou shalt say unto thy son, We
were Pharaoh's bondmen in Egypt; and the LORD brought us out of Egypt
with a mighty hand: 6:22 And the LORD shewed signs and wonders, great
and sore, upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his household, before
our eyes: 6:23 And he brought us out from thence, that he might bring
us in, to give us the land which he sware unto our fathers.

6:24 And the LORD commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the
LORD our God, for our good always, that he might preserve us alive, as
it is at this day.

6:25 And it shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these
commandments before the LORD our God, as he hath commanded us.

7:1 When the LORD thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou
goest to possess it, and hath cast out many nations before thee, the
Hittites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites,
and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, seven nations
greater and mightier than thou; 7:2 And when the LORD thy God shall
deliver them before thee; thou shalt smite them, and utterly destroy
them; thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor shew mercy unto them:
7:3 Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou
shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy
son.

7:4 For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may
serve other gods: so will the anger of the LORD be kindled against
you, and destroy thee suddenly.

7:5 But thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars,
and break down their images, and cut down their groves, and burn their
graven images with fire.

7:6 For thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy God: the LORD thy
God hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all
people that are upon the face of the earth.

7:7 The LORD did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye
were more in number than any people; for ye were the fewest of all
people: 7:8 But because the LORD loved you, and because he would keep
the oath which he had sworn unto your fathers, hath the LORD brought
you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you out of the house of
bondmen, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.

7:9 Know therefore that the LORD thy God, he is God, the faithful God,
which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his
commandments to a thousand generations; 7:10 And repayeth them that
hate him to their face, to destroy them: he will not be slack to him
that hateth him, he will repay him to his face.

7:11 Thou shalt therefore keep the commandments, and the statutes, and
the judgments, which I command thee this day, to do them.

7:12 Wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these
judgments, and keep, and do them, that the LORD thy God shall keep
unto thee the covenant and the mercy which he sware unto thy fathers:
7:13 And he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee: he will
also bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn,
and thy wine, and thine oil, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks
of thy sheep, in the land which he sware unto thy fathers to give
thee.

7:14 Thou shalt be blessed above all people: there shall not be male
or female barren among you, or among your cattle.

7:15 And the LORD will take away from thee all sickness, and will put
none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which thou knowest, upon thee; but
will lay them upon all them that hate thee.

7:16 And thou shalt consume all the people which the LORD thy God
shall deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them: neither
shalt thou serve their gods; for that will be a snare unto thee.

7:17 If thou shalt say in thine heart, These nations are more than I;
how can I dispossess them?  7:18 Thou shalt not be afraid of them: but
shalt well remember what the LORD thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto
all Egypt; 7:19 The great temptations which thine eyes saw, and the
signs, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, and the stretched out
arm, whereby the LORD thy God brought thee out: so shall the LORD thy
God do unto all the people of whom thou art afraid.

7:20 Moreover the LORD thy God will send the hornet among them, until
they that are left, and hide themselves from thee, be destroyed.

7:21 Thou shalt not be affrighted at them: for the LORD thy God is
among you, a mighty God and terrible.

7:22 And the LORD thy God will put out those nations before thee by
little and little: thou mayest not consume them at once, lest the
beasts of the field increase upon thee.

7:23 But the LORD thy God shall deliver them unto thee, and shall
destroy them with a mighty destruction, until they be destroyed.

7:24 And he shall deliver their kings into thine hand, and thou shalt
destroy their name from under heaven: there shall no man be able to
stand before thee, until thou have destroyed them.

7:25 The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire: thou
shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto
thee, lest thou be snared therin: for it is an abomination to the LORD
thy God.

7:26 Neither shalt thou bring an abomination into thine house, lest
thou be a cursed thing like it: but thou shalt utterly detest it, and
thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a cursed thing.

8:1 All the commandments which I command thee this day shall ye
observe to do, that ye may live, and multiply, and go in and possess
the land which the LORD sware unto your fathers.

8:2 And thou shalt remember all the way which the LORD thy God led
thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove
thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep his
commandments, or no.

8:3 And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee
with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers know; that
he might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, but by
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the LORD doth man live.

8:4 Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell,
these forty years.

8:5 Thou shalt also consider in thine heart, that, as a man chasteneth
his son, so the LORD thy God chasteneth thee.

8:6 Therefore thou shalt keep the commandments of the LORD thy God, to
walk in his ways, and to fear him.

8:7 For the LORD thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land of
brooks of water, of fountains and depths that spring out of valleys
and hills; 8:8 A land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees,
and pomegranates; a land of oil olive, and honey; 8:9 A land wherein
thou shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any thing
in it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou
mayest dig brass.

8:10 When thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the LORD
thy God for the good land which he hath given thee.

8:11 Beware that thou forget not the LORD thy God, in not keeping his
commandments, and his judgments, and his statutes, which I command
thee this day: 8:12 Lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast
built goodly houses, and dwelt therein; 8:13 And when thy herds and
thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and
all that thou hast is multiplied; 8:14 Then thine heart be lifted up,
and thou forget the LORD thy God, which brought thee forth out of the
land of Egypt, from the house of bondage; 8:15 Who led thee through
that great and terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery serpents, and
scorpions, and drought, where there was no water; who brought thee
forth water out of the rock of flint; 8:16 Who fed thee in the
wilderness with manna, which thy fathers knew not, that he might
humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy
latter end; 8:17 And thou say in thine heart, My power and the might
of mine hand hath gotten me this wealth.

8:18 But thou shalt remember the LORD thy God: for it is he that
giveth thee power to get wealth, that he may establish his covenant
which he sware unto thy fathers, as it is this day.

8:19 And it shall be, if thou do at all forget the LORD thy God, and
walk after other gods, and serve them, and worship them, I testify
against you this day that ye shall surely perish.

8:20 As the nations which the LORD destroyeth before your face, so
shall ye perish; because ye would not be obedient unto the voice of
the LORD your God.

9:1 Hear, O Israel: Thou art to pass over Jordan this day, to go in to
possess nations greater and mightier than thyself, cities great and
fenced up to heaven, 9:2 A people great and tall, the children of the
Anakims, whom thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard say, Who can
stand before the children of Anak!  9:3 Understand therefore this day,
that the LORD thy God is he which goeth over before thee; as a
consuming fire he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down
before thy face: so shalt thou drive them out, and destroy them
quickly, as the LORD hath said unto thee.

9:4 Speak not thou in thine heart, after that the LORD thy God hath
cast them out from before thee, saying, For my righteousness the LORD
hath brought me in to possess this land: but for the wickedness of
these nations the LORD doth drive them out from before thee.

9:5 Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart,
dost thou go to possess their land: but for the wickedness of these
nations the LORD thy God doth drive them out from before thee, and
that he may perform the word which the LORD sware unto thy fathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

9:6 Understand therefore, that the LORD thy God giveth thee not this
good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou art a
stiffnecked people.

9:7 Remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the LORD thy God to
wrath in the wilderness: from the day that thou didst depart out of
the land of Egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have been
rebellious against the LORD.

9:8 Also in Horeb ye provoked the LORD to wrath, so that the LORD was
angry with you to have destroyed you.

9:9 When I was gone up into the mount to receive the tables of stone,
even the tables of the covenant which the LORD made with you, then I
abode in the mount forty days and forty nights, I neither did eat
bread nor drink water: 9:10 And the LORD delivered unto me two tables
of stone written with the finger of God; and on them was written
according to all the words, which the LORD spake with you in the mount
out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly.

9:11 And it came to pass at the end of forty days and forty nights,
that the LORD gave me the two tables of stone, even the tables of the
covenant.

9:12 And the LORD said unto me, Arise, get thee down quickly from
hence; for thy people which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt have
corrupted themselves; they are quickly turned aside out of the way
which I commanded them; they have made them a molten image.

9:13 Furthermore the LORD spake unto me, saying, I have seen this
people, and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people: 9:14 Let me alone,
that I may destroy them, and blot out their name from under heaven:
and I will make of thee a nation mightier and greater than they.

9:15 So I turned and came down from the mount, and the mount burned
with fire: and the two tables of the covenant were in my two hands.

9:16 And I looked, and, behold, ye had sinned against the LORD your
God, and had made you a molten calf: ye had turned aside quickly out
of the way which the LORD had commanded you.

9:17 And I took the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and
brake them before your eyes.

9:18 And I fell down before the LORD, as at the first, forty days and
forty nights: I did neither eat bread, nor drink water, because of all
your sins which ye sinned, in doing wickedly in the sight of the LORD,
to provoke him to anger.

9:19 For I was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure, wherewith the
LORD was wroth against you to destroy you. But the LORD hearkened unto
me at that time also.

9:20 And the LORD was very angry with Aaron to have destroyed him: and
I prayed for Aaron also the same time.

9:21 And I took your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it
with fire, and stamped it, and ground it very small, even until it was
as small as dust: and I cast the dust thereof into the brook that
descended out of the mount.

9:22 And at Taberah, and at Massah, and at Kibrothhattaavah, ye
provoked the LORD to wrath.

9:23 Likewise when the LORD sent you from Kadeshbarnea, saying, Go up
and possess the land which I have given you; then ye rebelled against
the commandment of the LORD your God, and ye believed him not, nor
hearkened to his voice.

9:24 Ye have been rebellious against the LORD from the day that I knew
you.

9:25 Thus I fell down before the LORD forty days and forty nights, as
I fell down at the first; because the LORD had said he would destroy
you.

9:26 I prayed therefore unto the LORD, and said, O Lord GOD, destroy
not thy people and thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed through
thy greatness, which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt with a
mighty hand.

9:27 Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; look not unto
the stubbornness of this people, nor to their wickedness, nor to their
sin: 9:28 Lest the land whence thou broughtest us out say, Because the
LORD was not able to bring them into the land which he promised them,
and because he hated them, he hath brought them out to slay them in
the wilderness.

9:29 Yet they are thy people and thine inheritance, which thou
broughtest out by thy mighty power and by thy stretched out arm.

10:1 At that time the LORD said unto me, Hew thee two tables of stone
like unto the first, and come up unto me into the mount, and make thee
an ark of wood.

10:2 And I will write on the tables the words that were in the first
tables which thou brakest, and thou shalt put them in the ark.

10:3 And I made an ark of shittim wood, and hewed two tables of stone
like unto the first, and went up into the mount, having the two tables
in mine hand.

10:4 And he wrote on the tables, according to the first writing, the
ten commandments, which the LORD spake unto you in the mount out of
the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly: and the LORD gave
them unto me.

10:5 And I turned myself and came down from the mount, and put the
tables in the ark which I had made; and there they be, as the LORD
commanded me.

10:6 And the children of Israel took their journey from Beeroth of the
children of Jaakan to Mosera: there Aaron died, and there he was
buried; and Eleazar his son ministered in the priest's office in his
stead.

10:7 From thence they journeyed unto Gudgodah; and from Gudgodah to
Jotbath, a land of rivers of waters.

10:8 At that time the LORD separated the tribe of Levi, to bear the
ark of the covenant of the LORD, to stand before the LORD to minister
unto him, and to bless in his name, unto this day.

10:9 Wherefore Levi hath no part nor inheritance with his brethren;
the LORD is his inheritance, according as the LORD thy God promised
him.

10:10 And I stayed in the mount, according to the first time, forty
days and forty nights; and the LORD hearkened unto me at that time
also, and the LORD would not destroy thee.

10:11 And the LORD said unto me, Arise, take thy journey before the
people, that they may go in and possess the land, which I sware unto
their fathers to give unto them.

10:12 And now, Israel, what doth the LORD thy God require of thee, but
to fear the LORD thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him,
and to serve the LORD thy God with all thy heart and with all thy
soul, 10:13 To keep the commandments of the LORD, and his statutes,
which I command thee this day for thy good?  10:14 Behold, the heaven
and the heaven of heavens is the LORD's thy God, the earth also, with
all that therein is.

10:15 Only the LORD had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and he
chose their seed after them, even you above all people, as it is this
day.

10:16 Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more
stiffnecked.

10:17 For the LORD your God is God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great
God, a mighty, and a terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh
reward: 10:18 He doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and
widow, and loveth the stranger, in giving him food and raiment.

10:19 Love ye therefore the stranger: for ye were strangers in the
land of Egypt.

10:20 Thou shalt fear the LORD thy God; him shalt thou serve, and to
him shalt thou cleave, and swear by his name.

10:21 He is thy praise, and he is thy God, that hath done for thee
these great and terrible things, which thine eyes have seen.

10:22 Thy fathers went down into Egypt with threescore and ten
persons; and now the LORD thy God hath made thee as the stars of
heaven for multitude.

11:1 Therefore thou shalt love the LORD thy God, and keep his charge,
and his statutes, and his judgments, and his commandments, alway.

11:2 And know ye this day: for I speak not with your children which
have not known, and which have not seen the chastisement of the LORD
your God, his greatness, his mighty hand, and his stretched out arm,
11:3 And his miracles, and his acts, which he did in the midst of
Egypt unto Pharaoh the king of Egypt, and unto all his land; 11:4 And
what he did unto the army of Egypt, unto their horses, and to their
chariots; how he made the water of the Red sea to overflow them as
they pursued after you, and how the LORD hath destroyed them unto this
day; 11:5 And what he did unto you in the wilderness, until ye came
into this place; 11:6 And what he did unto Dathan and Abiram, the sons
of Eliab, the son of Reuben: how the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their households, and their tents, and all the
substance that was in their possession, in the midst of all Israel:
11:7 But your eyes have seen all the great acts of the LORD which he
did.

11:8 Therefore shall ye keep all the commandments which I command you
this day, that ye may be strong, and go in and possess the land,
whither ye go to possess it; 11:9 And that ye may prolong your days in
the land, which the LORD sware unto your fathers to give unto them and
to their seed, a land that floweth with milk and honey.

11:10 For the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the
land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy seed,
and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs: 11:11 But the
land, whither ye go to possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, and
drinketh water of the rain of heaven: 11:12 A land which the LORD thy
God careth for: the eyes of the LORD thy God are always upon it, from
the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year.

11:13 And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto
my commandments which I command you this day, to love the LORD your
God, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul,
11:14 That I will give you the rain of your land in his due season,
the first rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy
corn, and thy wine, and thine oil.

11:15 And I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou
mayest eat and be full.

11:16 Take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye
turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them; 11:17 And then the
LORD's wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that
there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and lest ye
perish quickly from off the good land which the LORD giveth you.

11:18 Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in
your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be
as frontlets between your eyes.

11:19 And ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when
thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when
thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

11:20 And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house,
and upon thy gates: 11:21 That your days may be multiplied, and the
days of your children, in the land which the LORD sware unto your
fathers to give them, as the days of heaven upon the earth.

11:22 For if ye shall diligently keep all these commandments which I
command you, to do them, to love the LORD your God, to walk in all his
ways, and to cleave unto him; 11:23 Then will the LORD drive out all
these nations from before you, and ye shall possess greater nations
and mightier than yourselves.

11:24 Every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread shall be
yours: from the wilderness and Lebanon, from the river, the river
Euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea shall your coast be.

11:25 There shall no man be able to stand before you: for the LORD
your God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon all the
land that ye shall tread upon, as he hath said unto you.

11:26 Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; 11:27
A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the LORD your God, which I
command you this day: 11:28 And a curse, if ye will not obey the
commandments of the LORD your God, but turn aside out of the way which
I command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not
known.

11:29 And it shall come to pass, when the LORD thy God hath brought
thee in unto the land whither thou goest to possess it, that thou
shalt put the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon mount
Ebal.

11:30 Are they not on the other side Jordan, by the way where the sun
goeth down, in the land of the Canaanites, which dwell in the
champaign over against Gilgal, beside the plains of Moreh?  11:31 For
ye shall pass over Jordan to go in to possess the land which the LORD
your God giveth you, and ye shall possess it, and dwell therein.

11:32 And ye shall observe to do all the statutes and judgments which
I set before you this day.

12:1 These are the statutes and judgments, which ye shall observe to
do in the land, which the LORD God of thy fathers giveth thee to
possess it, all the days that ye live upon the earth.

12:2 Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations
which ye shall possess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and
upon the hills, and under every green tree: 12:3 And ye shall
overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves
with fire; and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and
destroy the names of them out of that place.

12:4 Ye shall not do so unto the LORD your God.

12:5 But unto the place which the LORD your God shall choose out of
all your tribes to put his name there, even unto his habitation shall
ye seek, and thither thou shalt come: 12:6 And thither ye shall bring
your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave
offerings of your hand, and your vows, and your freewill offerings,
and the firstlings of your herds and of your flocks: 12:7 And there ye
shall eat before the LORD your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that
ye put your hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the LORD thy
God hath blessed thee.

12:8 Ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day,
every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.

12:9 For ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance,
which the LORD your God giveth you.

12:10 But when ye go over Jordan, and dwell in the land which the LORD
your God giveth you to inherit, and when he giveth you rest from all
your enemies round about, so that ye dwell in safety; 12:11 Then there
shall be a place which the LORD your God shall choose to cause his
name to dwell there; thither shall ye bring all that I command you;
your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave
offering of your hand, and all your choice vows which ye vow unto the
LORD: 12:12 And ye shall rejoice before the LORD your God, ye, and
your sons, and your daughters, and your menservants, and your
maidservants, and the Levite that is within your gates; forasmuch as
he hath no part nor inheritance with you.

12:13 Take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in
every place that thou seest: 12:14 But in the place which the LORD
shall choose in one of thy tribes, there thou shalt offer thy burnt
offerings, and there thou shalt do all that I command thee.

12:15 Notwithstanding thou mayest kill and eat flesh in all thy gates,
whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, according to the blessing of the
LORD thy God which he hath given thee: the unclean and the clean may
eat thereof, as of the roebuck, and as of the hart.

12:16 Only ye shall not eat the blood; ye shall pour it upon the earth
as water.

12:17 Thou mayest not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, or
of thy wine, or of thy oil, or the firstlings of thy herds or of thy
flock, nor any of thy vows which thou vowest, nor thy freewill
offerings, or heave offering of thine hand: 12:18 But thou must eat
them before the LORD thy God in the place which the LORD thy God shall
choose, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and
thy maidservant, and the Levite that is within thy gates: and thou
shalt rejoice before the LORD thy God in all that thou puttest thine
hands unto.

12:19 Take heed to thyself that thou forsake not the Levite as long as
thou livest upon the earth.

12:20 When the LORD thy God shall enlarge thy border, as he hath
promised thee, and thou shalt say, I will eat flesh, because thy soul
longeth to eat flesh; thou mayest eat flesh, whatsoever thy soul
lusteth after.

12:21 If the place which the LORD thy God hath chosen to put his name
there be too far from thee, then thou shalt kill of thy herd and of
thy flock, which the LORD hath given thee, as I have commanded thee,
and thou shalt eat in thy gates whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.

12:22 Even as the roebuck and the hart is eaten, so thou shalt eat
them: the unclean and the clean shall eat of them alike.

12:23 Only be sure that thou eat not the blood: for the blood is the
life; and thou mayest not eat the life with the flesh.

12:24 Thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour it upon the earth as
water.

12:25 Thou shalt not eat it; that it may go well with thee, and with
thy children after thee, when thou shalt do that which is right in the
sight of the LORD.

12:26 Only thy holy things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt
take, and go unto the place which the LORD shall choose: 12:27 And
thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon
the altar of the LORD thy God: and the blood of thy sacrifices shall
be poured out upon the altar of the LORD thy God, and thou shalt eat
the flesh.

12:28 Observe and hear all these words which I command thee, that it
may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee for ever, when
thou doest that which is good and right in the sight of the LORD thy
God.

12:29 When the LORD thy God shall cut off the nations from before
thee, whither thou goest to possess them, and thou succeedest them,
and dwellest in their land; 12:30 Take heed to thyself that thou be
not snared by following them, after that they be destroyed from before
thee; and that thou enquire not after their gods, saying, How did
these nations serve their gods? even so will I do likewise.

12:31 Thou shalt not do so unto the LORD thy God: for every
abomination to the LORD, which he hateth, have they done unto their
gods; for even their sons and their daughters they have burnt in the
fire to their gods.

12:32 What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shalt
not add thereto, nor diminish from it.

13:1 If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and
giveth thee a sign or a wonder, 13:2 And the sign or the wonder come
to pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, Let us go after other
gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serve them; 13:3 Thou
shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of
dreams: for the LORD your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the
LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul.

13:4 Ye shall walk after the LORD your God, and fear him, and keep his
commandments, and obey his voice, and ye shall serve him, and cleave
unto him.

13:5 And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to
death; because he hath spoken to turn you away from the LORD your God,
which brought you out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of
the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the LORD thy
God commanded thee to walk in. So shalt thou put the evil away from
the midst of thee.

13:6 If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy
daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine
own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other
gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers; 13:7 Namely,
of the gods of the people which are round about you, nigh unto thee,
or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even unto the
other end of the earth; 13:8 Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor
hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou
spare, neither shalt thou conceal him: 13:9 But thou shalt surely kill
him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and
afterwards the hand of all the people.

13:10 And thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he
hath sought to thrust thee away from the LORD thy God, which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.

13:11 And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any
such wickedness as this is among you.

13:12 If thou shalt hear say in one of thy cities, which the LORD thy
God hath given thee to dwell there, saying, 13:13 Certain men, the
children of Belial, are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn
the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve other gods,
which ye have not known; 13:14 Then shalt thou enquire, and make
search, and ask diligently; and, behold, if it be truth, and the thing
certain, that such abomination is wrought among you; 13:15 Thou shalt
surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword,
destroying it utterly, and all that is therein, and the cattle
thereof, with the edge of the sword.

13:16 And thou shalt gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the
street thereof, and shalt burn with fire the city, and all the spoil
thereof every whit, for the LORD thy God: and it shall be an heap for
ever; it shall not be built again.

13:17 And there shall cleave nought of the cursed thing to thine hand:
that the LORD may turn from the fierceness of his anger, and shew thee
mercy, and have compassion upon thee, and multiply thee, as he hath
sworn unto thy fathers; 13:18 When thou shalt hearken to the voice of
