the LORD thy God, to keep all his commandments which I command thee
this day, to do that which is right in the eyes of the LORD thy God.

14:1 Ye are the children of the LORD your God: ye shall not cut
yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for the dead.

14:2 For thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy God, and the LORD
hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself, above all the
nations that are upon the earth.

14:3 Thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.

14:4 These are the beasts which ye shall eat: the ox, the sheep, and
the goat, 14:5 The hart, and the roebuck, and the fallow deer, and the
wild goat, and the pygarg, and the wild ox, and the chamois.

14:6 And every beast that parteth the hoof, and cleaveth the cleft
into two claws, and cheweth the cud among the beasts, that ye shall
eat.

14:7 Nevertheless these ye shall not eat of them that chew the cud, or
of them that divide the cloven hoof; as the camel, and the hare, and
the coney: for they chew the cud, but divide not the hoof; therefore
they are unclean unto you.

14:8 And the swine, because it divideth the hoof, yet cheweth not the
cud, it is unclean unto you: ye shall not eat of their flesh, nor
touch their dead carcase.

14:9 These ye shall eat of all that are in the waters: all that have
fins and scales shall ye eat: 14:10 And whatsoever hath not fins and
scales ye may not eat; it is unclean unto you.

14:11 Of all clean birds ye shall eat.

14:12 But these are they of which ye shall not eat: the eagle, and the
ossifrage, and the ospray, 14:13 And the glede, and the kite, and the
vulture after his kind, 14:14 And every raven after his kind, 14:15
And the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after
his kind, 14:16 The little owl, and the great owl, and the swan, 14:17
And the pelican, and the gier eagle, and the cormorant, 14:18 And the
stork, and the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.

14:19 And every creeping thing that flieth is unclean unto you: they
shall not be eaten.

14:20 But of all clean fowls ye may eat.

14:21 Ye shall not eat of anything that dieth of itself: thou shalt
give it unto the stranger that is in thy gates, that he may eat it; or
thou mayest sell it unto an alien: for thou art an holy people unto
the LORD thy God.

Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's milk.

14:22 Thou shalt truly tithe all the increase of thy seed, that the
field bringeth forth year by year.

14:23 And thou shalt eat before the LORD thy God, in the place which
he shall choose to place his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy
wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herds and of thy
flocks; that thou mayest learn to fear the LORD thy God always.

14:24 And if the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not able
to carry it; or if the place be too far from thee, which the LORD thy
God shall choose to set his name there, when the LORD thy God hath
blessed thee: 14:25 Then shalt thou turn it into money, and bind up
the money in thine hand, and shalt go unto the place which the LORD
thy God shall choose: 14:26 And thou shalt bestow that money for
whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, for oxen, or for sheep, or for
wine, or for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul desireth: and
thou shalt eat there before the LORD thy God, and thou shalt rejoice,
thou, and thine household, 14:27 And the Levite that is within thy
gates; thou shalt not forsake him; for he hath no part nor inheritance
with thee.

14:28 At the end of three years thou shalt bring forth all the tithe
of thine increase the same year, and shalt lay it up within thy gates:
14:29 And the Levite, (because he hath no part nor inheritance with
thee,) and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, which are
within thy gates, shall come, and shall eat and be satisfied; that the
LORD thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hand which thou
doest.

15:1 At the end of every seven years thou shalt make a release.

15:2 And this is the manner of the release: Every creditor that
lendeth ought unto his neighbour shall release it; he shall not exact
it of his neighbour, or of his brother; because it is called the
LORD's release.

15:3 Of a foreigner thou mayest exact it again: but that which is
thine with thy brother thine hand shall release; 15:4 Save when there
shall be no poor among you; for the LORD shall greatly bless thee in
the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to
possess it: 15:5 Only if thou carefully hearken unto the voice of the
LORD thy God, to observe to do all these commandments which I command
thee this day.

15:6 For the LORD thy God blesseth thee, as he promised thee: and thou
shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt not borrow; and thou
shalt reign over many nations, but they shall not reign over thee.

15:7 If there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within
any of thy gates in thy land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, thou
shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor
brother: 15:8 But thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt
surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he wanteth.

15:9 Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying,
The seventh year, the year of release, is at hand; and thine eye be
evil against thy poor brother, and thou givest him nought; and he cry
unto the LORD against thee, and it be sin unto thee.

15:10 Thou shalt surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved
when thou givest unto him: because that for this thing the LORD thy
God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou puttest
thine hand unto.

15:11 For the poor shall never cease out of the land: therefore I
command thee, saying, Thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy
brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in thy land.

15:12 And if thy brother, an Hebrew man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold
unto thee, and serve thee six years; then in the seventh year thou
shalt let him go free from thee.

15:13 And when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shalt not let
him go away empty: 15:14 Thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy
flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy winepress: of that
wherewith the LORD thy God hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him.

15:15 And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of
Egypt, and the LORD thy God redeemed thee: therefore I command thee
this thing to day.

15:16 And it shall be, if he say unto thee, I will not go away from
thee; because he loveth thee and thine house, because he is well with
thee; 15:17 Then thou shalt take an aul, and thrust it through his ear
unto the door, and he shall be thy servant for ever. And also unto thy
maidservant thou shalt do likewise.

15:18 It shall not seem hard unto thee, when thou sendest him away
free from thee; for he hath been worth a double hired servant to thee,
in serving thee six years: and the LORD thy God shall bless thee in
all that thou doest.

15:19 All the firstling males that come of thy herd and of thy flock
thou shalt sanctify unto the LORD thy God: thou shalt do no work with
the firstling of thy bullock, nor shear the firstling of thy sheep.

15:20 Thou shalt eat it before the LORD thy God year by year in the
place which the LORD shall choose, thou and thy household.

15:21 And if there be any blemish therein, as if it be lame, or blind,
or have any ill blemish, thou shalt not sacrifice it unto the LORD thy
God.

15:22 Thou shalt eat it within thy gates: the unclean and the clean
person shall eat it alike, as the roebuck, and as the hart.

15:23 Only thou shalt not eat the blood thereof; thou shalt pour it
upon the ground as water.

16:1 Observe the month of Abib, and keep the passover unto the LORD
thy God: for in the month of Abib the LORD thy God brought thee forth
out of Egypt by night.

16:2 Thou shalt therefore sacrifice the passover unto the LORD thy
God, of the flock and the herd, in the place which the LORD shall
choose to place his name there.

16:3 Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it; seven days shalt thou
eat unleavened bread therewith, even the bread of affliction; for thou
camest forth out of the land of Egypt in haste: that thou mayest
remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt all
the days of thy life.

16:4 And there shall be no leavened bread seen with thee in all thy
coast seven days; neither shall there any thing of the flesh, which
thou sacrificedst the first day at even, remain all night until the
morning.

16:5 Thou mayest not sacrifice the passover within any of thy gates,
which the LORD thy God giveth thee: 16:6 But at the place which the
LORD thy God shall choose to place his name in, there thou shalt
sacrifice the passover at even, at the going down of the sun, at the
season that thou camest forth out of Egypt.

16:7 And thou shalt roast and eat it in the place which the LORD thy
God shall choose: and thou shalt turn in the morning, and go unto thy
tents.

16:8 Six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread: and on the seventh day
shall be a solemn assembly to the LORD thy God: thou shalt do no work
therein.

16:9 Seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee: begin to number the
seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the sickle to the
corn.

16:10 And thou shalt keep the feast of weeks unto the LORD thy God
with a tribute of a freewill offering of thine hand, which thou shalt
give unto the LORD thy God, according as the LORD thy God hath blessed
thee: 16:11 And thou shalt rejoice before the LORD thy God, thou, and
thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant,
and the Levite that is within thy gates, and the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are among you, in the place which the
LORD thy God hath chosen to place his name there.

16:12 And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt: and
thou shalt observe and do these statutes.

16:13 Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven days, after
that thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine: 16:14 And thou shalt
rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy
manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite, the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates.

16:15 Seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the LORD thy God
in the place which the LORD shall choose: because the LORD thy God
shall bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the works of thine
hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoice.

16:16 Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the LORD
thy God in the place which he shall choose; in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles: and
they shall not appear before the LORD empty: 16:17 Every man shall
give as he is able, according to the blessing of the LORD thy God
which he hath given thee.

16:18 Judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates, which
the LORD thy God giveth thee, throughout thy tribes: and they shall
judge the people with just judgment.

16:19 Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons,
neither take a gift: for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and
pervert the words of the righteous.

16:20 That which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou
mayest live, and inherit the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

16:21 Thou shalt not plant thee a grove of any trees near unto the
altar of the LORD thy God, which thou shalt make thee.

16:22 Neither shalt thou set thee up any image; which the LORD thy God
hateth.

17:1 Thou shalt not sacrifice unto the LORD thy God any bullock, or
sheep, wherein is blemish, or any evilfavouredness: for that is an
abomination unto the LORD thy God.

17:2 If there be found among you, within any of thy gates which the
LORD thy God giveth thee, man or woman, that hath wrought wickedness
in the sight of the LORD thy God, in transgressing his covenant, 17:3
And hath gone and served other gods, and worshipped them, either the
sun, or moon, or any of the host of heaven, which I have not
commanded; 17:4 And it be told thee, and thou hast heard of it, and
enquired diligently, and, behold, it be true, and the thing certain,
that such abomination is wrought in Israel: 17:5 Then shalt thou bring
forth that man or that woman, which have committed that wicked thing,
unto thy gates, even that man or that woman, and shalt stone them with
stones, till they die.

17:6 At the mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he that
is worthy of death be put to death; but at the mouth of one witness he
shall not be put to death.

17:7 The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to
death, and afterward the hands of all the people. So thou shalt put
the evil away from among you.

17:8 If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between
blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke,
being matters of controversy within thy gates: then shalt thou arise,
and get thee up into the place which the LORD thy God shall choose;
17:9 And thou shalt come unto the priests the Levites, and unto the
judge that shall be in those days, and enquire; and they shall shew
thee the sentence of judgment: 17:10 And thou shalt do according to
the sentence, which they of that place which the LORD shall choose
shall shew thee; and thou shalt observe to do according to all that
they inform thee: 17:11 According to the sentence of the law which
they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they shall
tell thee, thou shalt do: thou shalt not decline from the sentence
which they shall shew thee, to the right hand, nor to the left.

17:12 And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken
unto the priest that standeth to minister there before the LORD thy
God, or unto the judge, even that man shall die: and thou shalt put
away the evil from Israel.

17:13 And all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more
presumptuously.

17:14 When thou art come unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth
thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, I
will set a king over me, like as all the nations that are about me;
17:15 Thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee, whom the LORD thy
God shall choose: one from among thy brethren shalt thou set king over
thee: thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy
brother.

17:16 But he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the
people to return to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses:
forasmuch as the LORD hath said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return
no more that way.

17:17 Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn
not away: neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and
gold.

17:18 And it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom,
that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book out of that which
is before the priests the Levites: 17:19 And it shall be with him, and
he shall read therein all the days of his life: that he may learn to
fear the LORD his God, to keep all the words of this law and these
statutes, to do them: 17:20 That his heart be not lifted up above his
brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment, to the
right hand, or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in
his kingdom, he, and his children, in the midst of Israel.

18:1 The priests the Levites, and all the tribe of Levi, shall have no
part nor inheritance with Israel: they shall eat the offerings of the
LORD made by fire, and his inheritance.

18:2 Therefore shall they have no inheritance among their brethren:
the LORD is their inheritance, as he hath said unto them.

18:3 And this shall be the priest's due from the people, from them
that offer a sacrifice, whether it be ox or sheep; and they shall give
unto the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the maw.

18:4 The firstfruit also of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil,
and the first of the fleece of thy sheep, shalt thou give him.

18:5 For the LORD thy God hath chosen him out of all thy tribes, to
stand to minister in the name of the LORD, him and his sons for ever.

18:6 And if a Levite come from any of thy gates out of all Israel,
where he sojourned, and come with all the desire of his mind unto the
place which the LORD shall choose; 18:7 Then he shall minister in the
name of the LORD his God, as all his brethren the Levites do, which
stand there before the LORD.

18:8 They shall have like portions to eat, beside that which cometh of
the sale of his patrimony.

18:9 When thou art come into the land which the LORD thy God giveth
thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of those
nations.

18:10 There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son
or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or
an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch.

18:11 Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard,
or a necromancer.

18:12 For all that do these things are an abomination unto the LORD:
and because of these abominations the LORD thy God doth drive them out
from before thee.

18:13 Thou shalt be perfect with the LORD thy God.

18:14 For these nations, which thou shalt possess, hearkened unto
observers of times, and unto diviners: but as for thee, the LORD thy
God hath not suffered thee so to do.

18:15 The LORD thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the
midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall
hearken; 18:16 According to all that thou desiredst of the LORD thy
God in Horeb in the day of the assembly, saying, Let me not hear again
the voice of the LORD my God, neither let me see this great fire any
more, that I die not.

18:17 And the LORD said unto me, They have well spoken that which they
have spoken.

18:18 I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like
unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto
them all that I shall command him.

18:19 And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto
my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.

18:20 But the prophet, which shall presume to speak a word in my name,
which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the
name of other gods, even that prophet shall die.

18:21 And if thou say in thine heart, How shall we know the word which
the LORD hath not spoken?  18:22 When a prophet speaketh in the name
of the LORD, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the
thing which the LORD hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it
presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him.

19:1 When the LORD thy God hath cut off the nations, whose land the
LORD thy God giveth thee, and thou succeedest them, and dwellest in
their cities, and in their houses; 19:2 Thou shalt separate three
cities for thee in the midst of thy land, which the LORD thy God
giveth thee to possess it.

19:3 Thou shalt prepare thee a way, and divide the coasts of thy land,
which the LORD thy God giveth thee to inherit, into three parts, that
every slayer may flee thither.

19:4 And this is the case of the slayer, which shall flee thither,
that he may live: Whoso killeth his neighbour ignorantly, whom he
hated not in time past; 19:5 As when a man goeth into the wood with
his neighbour to hew wood, and his hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe
to cut down the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and
lighteth upon his neighbour, that he die; he shall flee unto one of
those cities, and live: 19:6 Lest the avenger of the blood pursue the
slayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is
long, and slay him; whereas he was not worthy of death, inasmuch as he
hated him not in time past.

19:7 Wherefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt separate three
cities for thee.

19:8 And if the LORD thy God enlarge thy coast, as he hath sworn unto
thy fathers, and give thee all the land which he promised to give unto
thy fathers; 19:9 If thou shalt keep all these commandments to do
them, which I command thee this day, to love the LORD thy God, and to
walk ever in his ways; then shalt thou add three cities more for thee,
beside these three: 19:10 That innocent blood be not shed in thy land,
which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and so blood be
upon thee.

19:11 But if any man hate his neighbour, and lie in wait for him, and
rise up against him, and smite him mortally that he die, and fleeth
into one of these cities: 19:12 Then the elders of his city shall send
and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of
blood, that he may die.

19:13 Thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shalt put away the guilt
of innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee.

19:14 Thou shalt not remove thy neighbour's landmark, which they of
old time have set in thine inheritance, which thou shalt inherit in
the land that the LORD thy God giveth thee to possess it.

19:15 One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or
for any sin, in any sin that he sinneth: at the mouth of two
witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be
established.

19:16 If a false witness rise up against any man to testify against
him that which is wrong; 19:17 Then both the men, between whom the
controversy is, shall stand before the LORD, before the priests and
the judges, which shall be in those days; 19:18 And the judges shall
make diligent inquisition: and, behold, if the witness be a false
witness, and hath testified falsely against his brother; 19:19 Then
shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother:
so shalt thou put the evil away from among you.

19:20 And those which remain shall hear, and fear, and shall
henceforth commit no more any such evil among you.

19:21 And thine eye shall not pity; but life shall go for life, eye
for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

20:1 When thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, and seest
horses, and chariots, and a people more than thou, be not afraid of
them: for the LORD thy God is with thee, which brought thee up out of
the land of Egypt.

20:2 And it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto the battle, that the
priest shall approach and speak unto the people, 20:3 And shall say
unto them, Hear, O Israel, ye approach this day unto battle against
your enemies: let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble,
neither be ye terrified because of them; 20:4 For the LORD your God is
he that goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save
you.

20:5 And the officers shall speak unto the people, saying, What man is
there that hath built a new house, and hath not dedicated it? let him
go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man
dedicate it.

20:6 And what man is he that hath planted a vineyard, and hath not yet
eaten of it? let him also go and return unto his house, lest he die in
the battle, and another man eat of it.

20:7 And what man is there that hath betrothed a wife, and hath not
taken her? let him go and return unto his house, lest he die in the
battle, and another man take her.

20:8 And the officers shall speak further unto the people, and they
shall say, What man is there that is fearful and fainthearted? let him
go and return unto his house, lest his brethren's heart faint as well
as his heart.

20:9 And it shall be, when the officers have made an end of speaking
unto the people that they shall make captains of the armies to lead
the people.

20:10 When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then
proclaim peace unto it.

20:11 And it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto
thee, then it shall be, that all the people that is found therein
shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee.

20:12 And if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war
against thee, then thou shalt besiege it: 20:13 And when the LORD thy
God hath delivered it into thine hands, thou shalt smite every male
thereof with the edge of the sword: 20:14 But the women, and the
little ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the
spoil thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself; and thou shalt eat the
spoil of thine enemies, which the LORD thy God hath given thee.

20:15 Thus shalt thou do unto all the cities which are very far off
from thee, which are not of the cities of these nations.

20:16 But of the cities of these people, which the LORD thy God doth
give thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that
breatheth: 20:17 But thou shalt utterly destroy them; namely, the
Hittites, and the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, the
Hivites, and the Jebusites; as the LORD thy God hath commanded thee:
20:18 That they teach you not to do after all their abominations,
which they have done unto their gods; so should ye sin against the
LORD your God.

20:19 When thou shalt besiege a city a long time, in making war
against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the trees thereof by
forcing an axe against them: for thou mayest eat of them, and thou
shalt not cut them down (for the tree of the field is man's life) to
employ them in the siege: 20:20 Only the trees which thou knowest that
they be not trees for meat, thou shalt destroy and cut them down; and
thou shalt build bulwarks against the city that maketh war with thee,
until it be subdued.

21:1 If one be found slain in the land which the LORD thy God giveth
thee to possess it, lying in the field, and it be not known who hath
slain him: 21:2 Then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth, and
they shall measure unto the cities which are round about him that is
slain: 21:3 And it shall be, that the city which is next unto the
slain man, even the elders of that city shall take an heifer, which
hath not been wrought with, and which hath not drawn in the yoke; 21:4
And the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer unto a rough
valley, which is neither eared nor sown, and shall strike off the
heifer's neck there in the valley: 21:5 And the priests the sons of
Levi shall come near; for them the LORD thy God hath chosen to
minister unto him, and to bless in the name of the LORD; and by their
word shall every controversy and every stroke be tried: 21:6 And all
the elders of that city, that are next unto the slain man, shall wash
their hands over the heifer that is beheaded in the valley: 21:7 And
they shall answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood, neither
have our eyes seen it.

21:8 Be merciful, O LORD, unto thy people Israel, whom thou hast
redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy people of Israel's
charge. And the blood shall be forgiven them.

21:9 So shalt thou put away the guilt of innocent blood from among
you, when thou shalt do that which is right in the sight of the LORD.

21:10 When thou goest forth to war against thine enemies, and the LORD
thy God hath delivered them into thine hands, and thou hast taken them
captive, 21:11 And seest among the captives a beautiful woman, and
hast a desire unto her, that thou wouldest have her to thy wife; 21:12
Then thou shalt bring her home to thine house, and she shall shave her
head, and pare her nails; 21:13 And she shall put the raiment of her
captivity from off her, and shall remain in thine house, and bewail
her father and her mother a full month: and after that thou shalt go
in unto her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife.

21:14 And it shall be, if thou have no delight in her, then thou shalt
let her go whither she will; but thou shalt not sell her at all for
money, thou shalt not make merchandise of her, because thou hast
humbled her.

21:15 If a man have two wives, one beloved, and another hated, and
they have born him children, both the beloved and the hated; and if
the firstborn son be hers that was hated: 21:16 Then it shall be, when
he maketh his sons to inherit that which he hath, that he may not make
the son of the beloved firstborn before the son of the hated, which is
indeed the firstborn: 21:17 But he shall acknowledge the son of the
hated for the firstborn, by giving him a double portion of all that he
hath: for he is the beginning of his strength; the right of the
firstborn is his.

21:18 If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey
the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that, when
they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them: 21:19 Then shall
his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the
elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place; 21:20 And they
shall say unto the elders of his city, This our son is stubborn and
rebellious, he will not obey our voice; he is a glutton, and a
drunkard.

21:21 And all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he
die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you; and all Israel shall
hear, and fear.

21:22 And if a man have committed a sin worthy of death, and he be to
be put to death, and thou hang him on a tree: 21:23 His body shall not
remain all night upon the tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him
that day; (for he that is hanged is accursed of God;) that thy land be
not defiled, which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.

22:1 Thou shalt not see thy brother's ox or his sheep go astray, and
hide thyself from them: thou shalt in any case bring them again unto
thy brother.

22:2 And if thy brother be not nigh unto thee, or if thou know him
not, then thou shalt bring it unto thine own house, and it shall be
with thee until thy brother seek after it, and thou shalt restore it
to him again.

22:3 In like manner shalt thou do with his ass; and so shalt thou do
with his raiment; and with all lost thing of thy brother's, which he
hath lost, and thou hast found, shalt thou do likewise: thou mayest
not hide thyself.

22:4 Thou shalt not see thy brother's ass or his ox fall down by the
way, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt surely help him to lift
them up again.

22:5 The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man,
neither shall a man put on a woman's garment: for all that do so are
abomination unto the LORD thy God.

22:6 If a bird's nest chance to be before thee in the way in any tree,
or on the ground, whether they be young ones, or eggs, and the dam
sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs, thou shalt not take the dam
with the young: 22:7 But thou shalt in any wise let the dam go, and
take the young to thee; that it may be well with thee, and that thou
mayest prolong thy days.

22:8 When thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make a battlement
for thy roof, that thou bring not blood upon thine house, if any man
fall from thence.

22:9 Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with divers seeds: lest the fruit
of thy seed which thou hast sown, and the fruit of thy vineyard, be
defiled.

22:10 Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together.

22:11 Thou shalt not wear a garment of divers sorts, as of woollen and
linen together.

22:12 Thou shalt make thee fringes upon the four quarters of thy
vesture, wherewith thou coverest thyself.

22:13 If any man take a wife, and go in unto her, and hate her, 22:14
And give occasions of speech against her, and bring up an evil name
upon her, and say, I took this woman, and when I came to her, I found
her not a maid: 22:15 Then shall the father of the damsel, and her
mother, take and bring forth the tokens of the damsel's virginity unto
the elders of the city in the gate: 22:16 And the damsel's father
shall say unto the elders, I gave my daughter unto this man to wife,
and he hateth her; 22:17 And, lo, he hath given occasions of speech
against her, saying, I found not thy daughter a maid; and yet these
are the tokens of my daughter's virginity. And they shall spread the
cloth before the elders of the city.

22:18 And the elders of that city shall take that man and chastise
him; 22:19 And they shall amerce him in an hundred shekels of silver,
and give them unto the father of the damsel, because he hath brought
up an evil name upon a virgin of Israel: and she shall be his wife; he
may not put her away all his days.

22:20 But if this thing be true, and the tokens of virginity be not
found for the damsel: 22:21 Then they shall bring out the damsel to
the door of her father's house, and the men of her city shall stone
her with stones that she die: because she hath wrought folly in
Israel, to play the whore in her father's house: so shalt thou put
evil away from among you.

22:22 If a man be found lying with a woman married to an husband, then
they shall both of them die, both the man that lay with the woman, and
the woman: so shalt thou put away evil from Israel.

22:23 If a damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a
man find her in the city, and lie with her; 22:24 Then ye shall bring
them both out unto the gate of that city, and ye shall stone them with
stones that they die; the damsel, because she cried not, being in the
city; and the man, because he hath humbled his neighbour's wife: so
thou shalt put away evil from among you.

22:25 But if a man find a betrothed damsel in the field, and the man
force her, and lie with her: then the man only that lay with her shall
die.

22:26 But unto the damsel thou shalt do nothing; there is in the
damsel no sin worthy of death: for as when a man riseth against his
neighbour, and slayeth him, even so is this matter: 22:27 For he found
her in the field, and the betrothed damsel cried, and there was none
to save her.

22:28 If a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is not betrothed,
and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found; 22:29 Then
the man that lay with her shall give unto the damsel's father fifty
shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife; because he hath humbled
her, he may not put her away all his days.

22:30 A man shall not take his father's wife, nor discover his
father's skirt.

23:1 He that is wounded in the stones, or hath his privy member cut
off, shall not enter into the congregation of the LORD.

23:2 A bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the LORD; even
to his tenth generation shall he not enter into the congregation of
the LORD.

23:3 An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of
the LORD; even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the
congregation of the LORD for ever: 23:4 Because they met you not with
bread and with water in the way, when ye came forth out of Egypt; and
because they hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor of Pethor of
Mesopotamia, to curse thee.

23:5 Nevertheless the LORD thy God would not hearken unto Balaam; but
the LORD thy God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because
the LORD thy God loved thee.

23:6 Thou shalt not seek their peace nor their prosperity all thy days
for ever.

23:7 Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite; for he is thy brother: thou
shalt not abhor an Egyptian; because thou wast a stranger in his land.

23:8 The children that are begotten of them shall enter into the
congregation of the LORD in their third generation.

23:9 When the host goeth forth against thine enemies, then keep thee
from every wicked thing.

23:10 If there be among you any man, that is not clean by reason of
uncleanness that chanceth him by night, then shall he go abroad out of
the camp, he shall not come within the camp: 23:11 But it shall be,
when evening cometh on, he shall wash himself with water: and when the
sun is down, he shall come into the camp again.

23:12 Thou shalt have a place also without the camp, whither thou
shalt go forth abroad: 23:13 And thou shalt have a paddle upon thy
weapon; and it shall be, when thou wilt ease thyself abroad, thou
shalt dig therewith, and shalt turn back and cover that which cometh
from thee: 23:14 For the LORD thy God walketh in the midst of thy
camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee;
therefore shall thy camp be holy: that he see no unclean thing in
thee, and turn away from thee.

23:15 Thou shalt not deliver unto his master the servant which is
escaped from his master unto thee: 23:16 He shall dwell with thee,
even among you, in that place which he shall choose in one of thy
gates, where it liketh him best: thou shalt not oppress him.

23:17 There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a
sodomite of the sons of Israel.

23:18 Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog,
into the house of the LORD thy God for any vow: for even both these
are abomination unto the LORD thy God.

23:19 Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money,
usury of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon usury: 23:20
Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother thou
shalt not lend upon usury: that the LORD thy God may bless thee in all
that thou settest thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to
possess it.

23:21 When thou shalt vow a vow unto the LORD thy God, thou shalt not
slack to pay it: for the LORD thy God will surely require it of thee;
and it would be sin in thee.

23:22 But if thou shalt forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee.

23:23 That which is gone out of thy lips thou shalt keep and perform;
even a freewill offering, according as thou hast vowed unto the LORD
thy God, which thou hast promised with thy mouth.

23:24 When thou comest into thy neighbour's vineyard, then thou mayest
eat grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure; but thou shalt not put any
in thy vessel.

23:25 When thou comest into the standing corn of thy neighbour, then
thou mayest pluck the ears with thine hand; but thou shalt not move a
sickle unto thy neighbour's standing corn.

24:1 When a man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to
pass that she find no favour in his eyes, because he hath found some
uncleanness in her: then let him write her a bill of divorcement, and
give it in her hand, and send her out of his house.

24:2 And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be
another man's wife.

24:3 And if the latter husband hate her, and write her a bill of
divorcement, and giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her out of his
house; or if the latter husband die, which took her to be his wife;
24:4 Her former husband, which sent her away, may not take her again
to be his wife, after that she is defiled; for that is abomination
before the LORD: and thou shalt not cause the land to sin, which the
LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.

24:5 When a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war,
neither shall he be charged with any business: but he shall be free at
home one year, and shall cheer up his wife which he hath taken.

24:6 No man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge:
for he taketh a man's life to pledge.

24:7 If a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of
Israel, and maketh merchandise of him, or selleth him; then that thief
shall die; and thou shalt put evil away from among you.

24:8 Take heed in the plague of leprosy, that thou observe diligently,
and do according to all that the priests the Levites shall teach you:
as I commanded them, so ye shall observe to do.

24:9 Remember what the LORD thy God did unto Miriam by the way, after
that ye were come forth out of Egypt.

24:10 When thou dost lend thy brother any thing, thou shalt not go
into his house to fetch his pledge.

24:11 Thou shalt stand abroad, and the man to whom thou dost lend
shall bring out the pledge abroad unto thee.

24:12 And if the man be poor, thou shalt not sleep with his pledge:
24:13 In any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the sun
goeth down, that he may sleep in his own raiment, and bless thee: and
it shall be righteousness unto thee before the LORD thy God.

24:14 Thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy,
whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that are in thy
land within thy gates: 24:15 At his day thou shalt give him his hire,
neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor, and setteth his
heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto the LORD, and it be sin
unto thee.

24:16 The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither
shall the children be put to death for the fathers: every man shall be
put to death for his own sin.

24:17 Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, nor of the
fatherless; nor take a widow's raiment to pledge: 24:18 But thou shalt
remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt, and the LORD thy God
redeemed thee thence: therefore I command thee to do this thing.

24:19 When thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field, and hast
forgot a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go again to fetch it: it
shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow: that
the LORD thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hands.

24:20 When thou beatest thine olive tree, thou shalt not go over the
boughs again: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and
for the widow.

24:21 When thou gatherest the grapes of thy vineyard, thou shalt not
glean it afterward: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless,
and for the widow.

24:22 And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of
Egypt: therefore I command thee to do this thing.

25:1 If there be a controversy between men, and they come unto
judgment, that the judges may judge them; then they shall justify the
righteous, and condemn the wicked.

25:2 And it shall be, if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten, that
the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his
face, according to his fault, by a certain number.

25:3 Forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed: lest, if he should
exceed, and beat him above these with many stripes, then thy brother
should seem vile unto thee.

25:4 Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he treadeth out the corn.

25:5 If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no
child, the wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger:
her husband's brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to
wife, and perform the duty of an husband's brother unto her.

25:6 And it shall be, that the firstborn which she beareth shall
succeed in the name of his brother which is dead, that his name be not
put out of Israel.

25:7 And if the man like not to take his brother's wife, then let his
brother's wife go up to the gate unto the elders, and say, My
husband's brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a name in
Israel, he will not perform the duty of my husband's brother.

25:8 Then the elders of his city shall call him, and speak unto him:
and if he stand to it, and say, I like not to take her; 25:9 Then
shall his brother's wife come unto him in the presence of the elders,
and loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, and shall
answer and say, So shall it be done unto that man that will not build
up his brother's house.

25:10 And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him that
hath his shoe loosed.

25:11 When men strive together one with another, and the wife of the
one draweth near for to deliver her husband out of the hand of him
that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand, and taketh him by the
secrets: 25:12 Then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall not
pity her.

25:13 Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a
small.

25:14 Thou shalt not have in thine house divers measures, a great and
a small.

25:15 But thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and
just measure shalt thou have: that thy days may be lengthened in the
land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

25:16 For all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are
an abomination unto the LORD thy God.

25:17 Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the way, when ye were come
forth out of Egypt; 25:18 How he met thee by the way, and smote the
hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind thee, when thou
wast faint and weary; and he feared not God.

25:19 Therefore it shall be, when the LORD thy God hath given thee
rest from all thine enemies round about, in the land which the LORD
thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it, that thou shalt
blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven; thou shalt not
forget it.

26:1 And it shall be, when thou art come in unto the land which the
LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and possessest it, and
dwellest therein; 26:2 That thou shalt take of the first of all the
fruit of the earth, which thou shalt bring of thy land that the LORD
thy God giveth thee, and shalt put it in a basket, and shalt go unto
the place which the LORD thy God shall choose to place his name there.

26:3 And thou shalt go unto the priest that shall be in those days,
and say unto him, I profess this day unto the LORD thy God, that I am
come unto the country which the LORD sware unto our fathers for to
give us.

26:4 And the priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, and set
it down before the altar of the LORD thy God.

26:5 And thou shalt speak and say before the LORD thy God, A Syrian
ready to perish was my father, and he went down into Egypt, and
sojourned there with a few, and became there a nation, great, mighty,
and populous: 26:6 And the Egyptians evil entreated us, and afflicted
us, and laid upon us hard bondage: 26:7 And when we cried unto the
LORD God of our fathers, the LORD heard our voice, and looked on our
affliction, and our labour, and our oppression: 26:8 And the LORD
brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and with an
outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs, and
with wonders: 26:9 And he hath brought us into this place, and hath
given us this land, even a land that floweth with milk and honey.

26:10 And now, behold, I have brought the firstfruits of the land,
which thou, O LORD, hast given me. And thou shalt set it before the
LORD thy God, and worship before the LORD thy God: 26:11 And thou
shalt rejoice in every good thing which the LORD thy God hath given
unto thee, and unto thine house, thou, and the Levite, and the
stranger that is among you.

26:12 When thou hast made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine
increase the third year, which is the year of tithing, and hast given
it unto the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, that
they may eat within thy gates, and be filled; 26:13 Then thou shalt
say before the LORD thy God, I have brought away the hallowed things
out of mine house, and also have given them unto the Levite, and unto
the stranger, to the fatherless, and to the widow, according to all
thy commandments which thou hast commanded me: I have not transgressed
thy commandments, neither have I forgotten them.

26:14 I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have I taken
away ought thereof for any unclean use, nor given ought thereof for
the dead: but I have hearkened to the voice of the LORD my God, and
have done according to all that thou hast commanded me.

26:15 Look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy
people Israel, and the land which thou hast given us, as thou swarest
unto our fathers, a land that floweth with milk and honey.

26:16 This day the LORD thy God hath commanded thee to do these
statutes and judgments: thou shalt therefore keep and do them with all
thine heart, and with all thy soul.

26:17 Thou hast avouched the LORD this day to be thy God, and to walk
in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his
judgments, and to hearken unto his voice: 26:18 And the LORD hath
avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised
thee, and that thou shouldest keep all his commandments; 26:19 And to
make thee high above all nations which he hath made, in praise, and in
name, and in honour; and that thou mayest be an holy people unto the
LORD thy God, as he hath spoken.

27:1 And Moses with the elders of Israel commanded the people, saying,
Keep all the commandments which I command you this day.

27:2 And it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over Jordan unto
the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, that thou shalt set thee
up great stones, and plaister them with plaister: 27:3 And thou shalt
