was ruler of the treasures.

26:25 And his brethren by Eliezer; Rehabiah his son, and Jeshaiah his
son, and Joram his son, and Zichri his son, and Shelomith his son.

26:26 Which Shelomith and his brethren were over all the treasures of
the dedicated things, which David the king, and the chief fathers, the
captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the host,
had dedicated.

26:27 Out of the spoils won in battles did they dedicate to maintain
the house of the LORD.

26:28 And all that Samuel the seer, and Saul the son of Kish, and
Abner the son of Ner, and Joab the son of Zeruiah, had dedicated; and
whosoever had dedicated any thing, it was under the hand of Shelomith,
and of his brethren.

26:29 Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons were for the outward
business over Israel, for officers and judges.

26:30 And of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his brethren, men of
valour, a thousand and seven hundred, were officers among them of
Israel on this side Jordan westward in all the business of the LORD,
and in the service of the king.

26:31 Among the Hebronites was Jerijah the chief, even among the
Hebronites, according to the generations of his fathers. In the
fortieth year of the reign of David they were sought for, and there
were found among them mighty men of valour at Jazer of Gilead.

26:32 And his brethren, men of valour, were two thousand and seven
hundred chief fathers, whom king David made rulers over the
Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh, for every
matter pertaining to God, and affairs of the king.

27:1 Now the children of Israel after their number, to wit, the chief
fathers and captains of thousands and hundreds, and their officers
that served the king in any matter of the courses, which came in and
went out month by month throughout all the months of the year, of
every course were twenty and four thousand.

27:2 Over the first course for the first month was Jashobeam the son
of Zabdiel: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.

27:3 Of the children of Perez was the chief of all the captains of the
host for the first month.

27:4 And over the course of the second month was Dodai an Ahohite, and
of his course was Mikloth also the ruler: in his course likewise were
twenty and four thousand.

27:5 The third captain of the host for the third month was Benaiah the
son of Jehoiada, a chief priest: and in his course were twenty and
four thousand.

27:6 This is that Benaiah, who was mighty among the thirty, and above
the thirty: and in his course was Ammizabad his son.

27:7 The fourth captain for the fourth month was Asahel the brother of
Joab, and Zebadiah his son after him: and in his course were twenty
and four thousand.

27:8 The fifth captain for the fifth month was Shamhuth the Izrahite:
and in his course were twenty and four thousand.

27:9 The sixth captain for the sixth month was Ira the son of Ikkesh
the Tekoite: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.

27:10 The seventh captain for the seventh month was Helez the
Pelonite, of the children of Ephraim: and in his course were twenty
and four thousand.

27:11 The eighth captain for the eighth month was Sibbecai the
Hushathite, of the Zarhites: and in his course were twenty and four
thousand.

27:12 The ninth captain for the ninth month was Abiezer the
Anetothite, of the Benjamites: and in his course were twenty and four
thousand.

27:13 The tenth captain for the tenth month was Maharai the
Netophathite, of the Zarhites: and in his course were twenty and four
thousand.

27:14 The eleventh captain for the eleventh month was Benaiah the
Pirathonite, of the children of Ephraim: and in his course were twenty
and four thousand.

27:15 The twelfth captain for the twelfth month was Heldai the
Netophathite, of Othniel: and in his course were twenty and four
thousand.

27:16 Furthermore over the tribes of Israel: the ruler of the
Reubenites was Eliezer the son of Zichri: of the Simeonites,
Shephatiah the son of Maachah: 27:17 Of the Levites, Hashabiah the son
of Kemuel: of the Aaronites, Zadok: 27:18 Of Judah, Elihu, one of the
brethren of David: of Issachar, Omri the son of Michael: 27:19 Of
Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son of Obadiah: of Naphtali, Jerimoth the son of
Azriel: 27:20 Of the children of Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Azaziah:
of the half tribe of Manasseh, Joel the son of Pedaiah: 27:21 Of the
half tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of Zechariah: of
Benjamin, Jaasiel the son of Abner: 27:22 Of Dan, Azareel the son of
Jeroham. These were the princes of the tribes of Israel.

27:23 But David took not the number of them from twenty years old and
under: because the LORD had said he would increase Israel like to the
stars of the heavens.

27:24 Joab the son of Zeruiah began to number, but he finished not,
because there fell wrath for it against Israel; neither was the number
put in the account of the chronicles of king David.

27:25 And over the king's treasures was Azmaveth the son of Adiel: and
over the storehouses in the fields, in the cities, and in the
villages, and in the castles, was Jehonathan the son of Uzziah: 27:26
And over them that did the work of the field for tillage of the ground
was Ezri the son of Chelub: 27:27 And over the vineyards was Shimei
the Ramathite: over the increase of the vineyards for the wine cellars
was Zabdi the Shiphmite: 27:28 And over the olive trees and the
sycomore trees that were in the low plains was Baalhanan the Gederite:
and over the cellars of oil was Joash: 27:29 And over the herds that
fed in Sharon was Shitrai the Sharonite: and over the herds that were
in the valleys was Shaphat the son of Adlai: 27:30 Over the camels
also was Obil the Ishmaelite: and over the asses was Jehdeiah the
Meronothite: 27:31 And over the flocks was Jaziz the Hagerite. All
these were the rulers of the substance which was king David's.

27:32 Also Jonathan David's uncle was a counsellor, a wise man, and a
scribe: and Jehiel the son of Hachmoni was with the king's sons: 27:33
And Ahithophel was the king's counsellor: and Hushai the Archite was
the king's companion: 27:34 And after Ahithophel was Jehoiada the son
of Benaiah, and Abiathar: and the general of the king's army was Joab.

28:1 And David assembled all the princes of Israel, the princes of the
tribes, and the captains of the companies that ministered to the king
by course, and the captains over the thousands, and captains over the
hundreds, and the stewards over all the substance and possession of
the king, and of his sons, with the officers, and with the mighty men,
and with all the valiant men, unto Jerusalem.

28:2 Then David the king stood up upon his feet, and said, Hear me, my
brethren, and my people: As for me, I had in mine heart to build an
house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and for the
footstool of our God, and had made ready for the building: 28:3 But
God said unto me, Thou shalt not build an house for my name, because
thou hast been a man of war, and hast shed blood.

28:4 Howbeit the LORD God of Israel chose me before all the house of
my father to be king over Israel for ever: for he hath chosen Judah to
be the ruler; and of the house of Judah, the house of my father; and
among the sons of my father he liked me to make me king over all
Israel: 28:5 And of all my sons, (for the LORD hath given me many
sons,) he hath chosen Solomon my son to sit upon the throne of the
kingdom of the LORD over Israel.

28:6 And he said unto me, Solomon thy son, he shall build my house and
my courts: for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will be his
father.

28:7 Moreover I will establish his kingdom for ever, if he be constant
to do my commandments and my judgments, as at this day.

28:8 Now therefore in the sight of all Israel the congregation of the
LORD, and in the audience of our God, keep and seek for all the
commandments of the LORD your God: that ye may possess this good land,
and leave it for an inheritance for your children after you for ever.

28:9 And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and
serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind: for the LORD
searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the imaginations of the
thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou
forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

28:10 Take heed now; for the LORD hath chosen thee to build an house
for the sanctuary: be strong, and do it.

28:11 Then David gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch, and
of the houses thereof, and of the treasuries thereof, and of the upper
chambers thereof, and of the inner parlours thereof, and of the place
of the mercy seat, 28:12 And the pattern of all that he had by the
spirit, of the courts of the house of the LORD, and of all the
chambers round about, of the treasuries of the house of God, and of
the treasuries of the dedicated things: 28:13 Also for the courses of
the priests and the Levites, and for all the work of the service of
the house of the LORD, and for all the vessels of service in the house
of the LORD.

28:14 He gave of gold by weight for things of gold, for all
instruments of all manner of service; silver also for all instruments
of silver by weight, for all instruments of every kind of service:
28:15 Even the weight for the candlesticks of gold, and for their
lamps of gold, by weight for every candlestick, and for the lamps
thereof: and for the candlesticks of silver by weight, both for the
candlestick, and also for the lamps thereof, according to the use of
every candlestick.

28:16 And by weight he gave gold for the tables of shewbread, for
every table; and likewise silver for the tables of silver: 28:17 Also
pure gold for the fleshhooks, and the bowls, and the cups: and for the
golden basons he gave gold by weight for every bason; and likewise
silver by weight for every bason of silver: 28:18 And for the altar of
incense refined gold by weight; and gold for the pattern of the
chariot of the cherubims, that spread out their wings, and covered the
ark of the covenant of the LORD.

28:19 All this, said David, the LORD made me understand in writing by
his hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern.

28:20 And David said to Solomon his son, Be strong and of good
courage, and do it: fear not, nor be dismayed: for the LORD God, even
my God, will be with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee,
until thou hast finished all the work for the service of the house of
the LORD.

28:21 And, behold, the courses of the priests and the Levites, even
they shall be with thee for all the service of the house of God: and
there shall be with thee for all manner of workmanship every willing
skilful man, for any manner of service: also the princes and all the
people will be wholly at thy commandment.

29:1 Furthermore David the king said unto all the congregation,
Solomon my son, whom alone God hath chosen, is yet young and tender,
and the work is great: for the palace is not for man, but for the LORD
God.

29:2 Now I have prepared with all my might for the house of my God the
gold for things to be made of gold, and the silver for things of
silver, and the brass for things of brass, the iron for things of
iron, and wood for things of wood; onyx stones, and stones to be set,
glistering stones, and of divers colours, and all manner of precious
stones, and marble stones in abundance.

29:3 Moreover, because I have set my affection to the house of my God,
I have of mine own proper good, of gold and silver, which I have given
to the house of my God, over and above all that I have prepared for
the holy house.

29:4 Even three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and
seven thousand talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the
houses withal: 29:5 The gold for things of gold, and the silver for
things of silver, and for all manner of work to be made by the hands
of artificers. And who then is willing to consecrate his service this
day unto the LORD?  29:6 Then the chief of the fathers and princes of
the tribes of Israel and the captains of thousands and of hundreds,
with the rulers of the king's work, offered willingly, 29:7 And gave
for the service of the house of God of gold five thousand talents and
ten thousand drams, and of silver ten thousand talents, and of brass
eighteen thousand talents, and one hundred thousand talents of iron.

29:8 And they with whom precious stones were found gave them to the
treasure of the house of the LORD, by the hand of Jehiel the
Gershonite.

29:9 Then the people rejoiced, for that they offered willingly,
because with perfect heart they offered willingly to the LORD: and
David the king also rejoiced with great joy.

29:10 Wherefore David blessed the LORD before all the congregation:
and David said, Blessed be thou, LORD God of Israel our father, for
ever and ever.

29:11 Thine, O LORD is the greatness, and the power, and the glory,
and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven and in
the earth is thine; thine is the kingdom, O LORD, and thou art exalted
as head above all.

29:12 Both riches and honour come of thee, and thou reignest over all;
and in thine hand is power and might; and in thine hand it is to make
great, and to give strength unto all.

29:13 Now therefore, our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious
name.

29:14 But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to
offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee, and
of thine own have we given thee.

29:15 For we are strangers before thee, and sojourners, as were all
our fathers: our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is none
abiding.

29:16 O LORD our God, all this store that we have prepared to build
thee an house for thine holy name cometh of thine hand, and is all
thine own.

29:17 I know also, my God, that thou triest the heart, and hast
pleasure in uprightness. As for me, in the uprightness of mine heart I
have willingly offered all these things: and now have I seen with joy
thy people, which are present here, to offer willingly unto thee.

29:18 O LORD God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, our fathers, keep
this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy
people, and prepare their heart unto thee: 29:19 And give unto Solomon
my son a perfect heart, to keep thy commandments, thy testimonies, and
thy statutes, and to do all these things, and to build the palace, for
the which I have made provision.

29:20 And David said to all the congregation, Now bless the LORD your
God.

And all the congregation blessed the LORD God of their fathers, and
bowed down their heads, and worshipped the LORD, and the king.

29:21 And they sacrificed sacrifices unto the LORD, and offered burnt
offerings unto the LORD, on the morrow after that day, even a thousand
bullocks, a thousand rams, and a thousand lambs, with their drink
offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel: 29:22 And did
eat and drink before the LORD on that day with great gladness. And
they made Solomon the son of David king the second time, and anointed
him unto the LORD to be the chief governor, and Zadok to be priest.

29:23 Then Solomon sat on the throne of the LORD as king instead of
David his father, and prospered; and all Israel obeyed him.

29:24 And all the princes, and the mighty men, and all the sons
likewise of king David, submitted themselves unto Solomon the king.

29:25 And the LORD magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all
Israel, and bestowed upon him such royal majesty as had not been on
any king before him in Israel.

29:26 Thus David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel.

29:27 And the time that he reigned over Israel was forty years; seven
years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and three years reigned he in
Jerusalem.

29:28 And he died in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honour:
and Solomon his son reigned in his stead.

29:29 Now the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they are
written in the book of Samuel the seer, and in the book of Nathan the
prophet, and in the book of Gad the seer, 29:30 With all his reign and
his might, and the times that went over him, and over Israel, and over
all the kingdoms of the countries.




The Second Book of the Chronicles


1:1 And Solomon the son of David was strengthened in his kingdom, and
the LORD his God was with him, and magnified him exceedingly.

1:2 Then Solomon spake unto all Israel, to the captains of thousands
and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every governor in all
Israel, the chief of the fathers.

1:3 So Solomon, and all the congregation with him, went to the high
place that was at Gibeon; for there was the tabernacle of the
congregation of God, which Moses the servant of the LORD had made in
the wilderness.

1:4 But the ark of God had David brought up from Kirjathjearim to the
place which David had prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for
it at Jerusalem.

1:5 Moreover the brasen altar, that Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son
of Hur, had made, he put before the tabernacle of the LORD: and
Solomon and the congregation sought unto it.

1:6 And Solomon went up thither to the brasen altar before the LORD,
which was at the tabernacle of the congregation, and offered a
thousand burnt offerings upon it.

1:7 In that night did God appear unto Solomon, and said unto him, Ask
what I shall give thee.

1:8 And Solomon said unto God, Thou hast shewed great mercy unto David
my father, and hast made me to reign in his stead.

1:9 Now, O LORD God, let thy promise unto David my father be
established: for thou hast made me king over a people like the dust of
the earth in multitude.

1:10 Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in
before this people: for who can judge this thy people, that is so
great?  1:11 And God said to Solomon, Because this was in thine heart,
and thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of
thine enemies, neither yet hast asked long life; but hast asked wisdom
and knowledge for thyself, that thou mayest judge my people, over whom
I have made thee king: 1:12 Wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee;
and I will give thee riches, and wealth, and honour, such as none of
the kings have had that have been before thee, neither shall there any
after thee have the like.

1:13 Then Solomon came from his journey to the high place that was at
Gibeon to Jerusalem, from before the tabernacle of the congregation,
and reigned over Israel.

1:14 And Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen: and he had a thousand
and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, which he
placed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.

1:15 And the king made silver and gold at Jerusalem as plenteous as
stones, and cedar trees made he as the sycomore trees that are in the
vale for abundance.

1:16 And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the
king's merchants received the linen yarn at a price.

1:17 And they fetched up, and brought forth out of Egypt a chariot for
six hundred shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty:
and so brought they out horses for all the kings of the Hittites, and
for the kings of Syria, by their means.

2:1 And Solomon determined to build an house for the name of the LORD,
and an house for his kingdom.

2:2 And Solomon told out threescore and ten thousand men to bear
burdens, and fourscore thousand to hew in the mountain, and three
thousand and six hundred to oversee them.

2:3 And Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tyre, saying, As thou didst
deal with David my father, and didst send him cedars to build him an
house to dwell therein, even so deal with me.

2:4 Behold, I build an house to the name of the LORD my God, to
dedicate it to him, and to burn before him sweet incense, and for the
continual shewbread, and for the burnt offerings morning and evening,
on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn feasts of the
LORD our God. This is an ordinance for ever to Israel.

2:5 And the house which I build is great: for great is our God above
all gods.

2:6 But who is able to build him an house, seeing the heaven and
heaven of heavens cannot contain him? who am I then, that I should
build him an house, save only to burn sacrifice before him?  2:7 Send
me now therefore a man cunning to work in gold, and in silver, and in
brass, and in iron, and in purple, and crimson, and blue, and that can
skill to grave with the cunning men that are with me in Judah and in
Jerusalem, whom David my father did provide.

2:8 Send me also cedar trees, fir trees, and algum trees, out of
Lebanon: for I know that thy servants can skill to cut timber in
Lebanon; and, behold, my servants shall be with thy servants, 2:9 Even
to prepare me timber in abundance: for the house which I am about to
build shall be wonderful great.

2:10 And, behold, I will give to thy servants, the hewers that cut
timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and twenty thousand
measures of barley, and twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty
thousand baths of oil.

2:11 Then Huram the king of Tyre answered in writing, which he sent to
Solomon, Because the LORD hath loved his people, he hath made thee
king over them.

2:12 Huram said moreover, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel, that made
heaven and earth, who hath given to David the king a wise son, endued
with prudence and understanding, that might build an house for the
LORD, and an house for his kingdom.

2:13 And now I have sent a cunning man, endued with understanding, of
Huram my father's, 2:14 The son of a woman of the daughters of Dan,
and his father was a man of Tyre, skilful to work in gold, and in
silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in
blue, and in fine linen, and in crimson; also to grave any manner of
graving, and to find out every device which shall be put to him, with
thy cunning men, and with the cunning men of my lord David thy father.

2:15 Now therefore the wheat, and the barley, the oil, and the wine,
which my lord hath spoken of, let him send unto his servants: 2:16 And
we will cut wood out of Lebanon, as much as thou shalt need: and we
will bring it to thee in floats by sea to Joppa; and thou shalt carry
it up to Jerusalem.

2:17 And Solomon numbered all the strangers that were in the land of
Israel, after the numbering wherewith David his father had numbered
them; and they were found an hundred and fifty thousand and three
thousand and six hundred.

2:18 And he set threescore and ten thousand of them to be bearers of
burdens, and fourscore thousand to be hewers in the mountain, and
three thousand and six hundred overseers to set the people a work.

3:1 Then Solomon began to build the house of the LORD at Jerusalem in
mount Moriah, where the Lord appeared unto David his father, in the
place that David had prepared in the threshingfloor of Ornan the
Jebusite.

3:2 And he began to build in the second day of the second month, in
the fourth year of his reign.

3:3 Now these are the things wherein Solomon was instructed for the
building of the house of God. The length by cubits after the first
measure was threescore cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits.

3:4 And the porch that was in the front of the house, the length of it
was according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the
height was an hundred and twenty: and he overlaid it within with pure
gold.

3:5 And the greater house he cieled with fir tree, which he overlaid
with fine gold, and set thereon palm trees and chains.

3:6 And he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty: and
the gold was gold of Parvaim.

3:7 He overlaid also the house, the beams, the posts, and the walls
thereof, and the doors thereof, with gold; and graved cherubims on the
walls.

3:8 And he made the most holy house, the length whereof was according
to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof
twenty cubits: and he overlaid it with fine gold, amounting to six
hundred talents.

3:9 And the weight of the nails was fifty shekels of gold. And he
overlaid the upper chambers with gold.

3:10 And in the most holy house he made two cherubims of image work,
and overlaid them with gold.

3:11 And the wings of the cherubims were twenty cubits long: one wing
of the one cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house:
and the other wing was likewise five cubits, reaching to the wing of
the other cherub.

3:12 And one wing of the other cherub was five cubits, reaching to the
wall of the house: and the other wing was five cubits also, joining to
the wing of the other cherub.

3:13 The wings of these cherubims spread themselves forth twenty
cubits: and they stood on their feet, and their faces were inward.

3:14 And he made the vail of blue, and purple, and crimson, and fine
linen, and wrought cherubims thereon.

3:15 Also he made before the house two pillars of thirty and five
cubits high, and the chapiter that was on the top of each of them was
five cubits.

3:16 And he made chains, as in the oracle, and put them on the heads
of the pillars; and made an hundred pomegranates, and put them on the
chains.

3:17 And he reared up the pillars before the temple, one on the right
hand, and the other on the left; and called the name of that on the
right hand Jachin, and the name of that on the left Boaz.

4:1 Moreover he made an altar of brass, twenty cubits the length
thereof, and twenty cubits the breadth thereof, and ten cubits the
height thereof.

4:2 Also he made a molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round
in compass, and five cubits the height thereof; and a line of thirty
cubits did compass it round about.

4:3 And under it was the similitude of oxen, which did compass it
round about: ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round about. Two rows
of oxen were cast, when it was cast.

4:4 It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and
three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and
three looking toward the east: and the sea was set above upon them,
and all their hinder parts were inward.

4:5 And the thickness of it was an handbreadth, and the brim of it
like the work of the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies; and it
received and held three thousand baths.

4:6 He made also ten lavers, and put five on the right hand, and five
on the left, to wash in them: such things as they offered for the
burnt offering they washed in them; but the sea was for the priests to
wash in.

4:7 And he made ten candlesticks of gold according to their form, and
set them in the temple, five on the right hand, and five on the left.

4:8 He made also ten tables, and placed them in the temple, five on
the right side, and five on the left. And he made an hundred basons of
gold.

4:9 Furthermore he made the court of the priests, and the great court,
and doors for the court, and overlaid the doors of them with brass.

4:10 And he set the sea on the right side of the east end, over
against the south.

4:11 And Huram made the pots, and the shovels, and the basons. And
Huram finished the work that he was to make for king Solomon for the
house of God; 4:12 To wit, the two pillars, and the pommels, and the
chapiters which were on the top of the two pillars, and the two
wreaths to cover the two pommels of the chapiters which were on the
top of the pillars; 4:13 And four hundred pomegranates on the two
wreaths; two rows of pomegranates on each wreath, to cover the two
pommels of the chapiters which were upon the pillars.

4:14 He made also bases, and lavers made he upon the bases; 4:15 One
sea, and twelve oxen under it.

4:16 The pots also, and the shovels, and the fleshhooks, and all their
instruments, did Huram his father make to king Solomon for the house
of the LORD of bright brass.

4:17 In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground
between Succoth and Zeredathah.

4:18 Thus Solomon made all these vessels in great abundance: for the
weight of the brass could not be found out.

4:19 And Solomon made all the vessels that were for the house of God,
the golden altar also, and the tables whereon the shewbread was set;
4:20 Moreover the candlesticks with their lamps, that they should burn
after the manner before the oracle, of pure gold; 4:21 And the
flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, made he of gold, and that
perfect gold; 4:22 And the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons,
and the censers, of pure gold: and the entry of the house, the inner
doors thereof for the most holy place, and the doors of the house of
the temple, were of gold.

5:1 Thus all the work that Solomon made for the house of the LORD was
finished: and Solomon brought in all the things that David his father
had dedicated; and the silver, and the gold, and all the instruments,
put he among the treasures of the house of God.

5:2 Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of
the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto
Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of the
city of David, which is Zion.

5:3 Wherefore all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto the king
in the feast which was in the seventh month.

5:4 And all the elders of Israel came; and the Levites took up the
ark.

5:5 And they brought up the ark, and the tabernacle of the
congregation, and all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle,
these did the priests and the Levites bring up.

5:6 Also king Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel that were
assembled unto him before the ark, sacrificed sheep and oxen, which
could not be told nor numbered for multitude.

5:7 And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the LORD
unto his place, to the oracle of the house, into the most holy place,
even under the wings of the cherubims: 5:8 For the cherubims spread
forth their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubims covered
the ark and the staves thereof above.

5:9 And they drew out the staves of the ark, that the ends of the
staves were seen from the ark before the oracle; but they were not
seen without. And there it is unto this day.

5:10 There was nothing in the ark save the two tables which Moses put
therein at Horeb, when the LORD made a covenant with the children of
Israel, when they came out of Egypt.

5:11 And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy
place: (for all the priests that were present were sanctified, and did
not then wait by course: 5:12 Also the Levites which were the singers,
all of them of Asaph, of Heman, of Jeduthun, with their sons and their
brethren, being arrayed in white linen, having cymbals and psalteries
and harps, stood at the east end of the altar, and with them an
hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets:) 5:13 It came even
to pass, as the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound
to be heard in praising and thanking the LORD; and when they lifted up
their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of musick,
and praised the LORD, saying, For he is good; for his mercy endureth
for ever: that then the house was filled with a cloud, even the house
of the LORD; 5:14 So that the priests could not stand to minister by
reason of the cloud: for the glory of the LORD had filled the house of
God.

6:1 Then said Solomon, The LORD hath said that he would dwell in the
thick darkness.

6:2 But I have built an house of habitation for thee, and a place for
thy dwelling for ever.

6:3 And the king turned his face, and blessed the whole congregation
of Israel: and all the congregation of Israel stood.

6:4 And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel, who hath with his
hands fulfilled that which he spake with his mouth to my father David,
saying, 6:5 Since the day that I brought forth my people out of the
land of Egypt I chose no city among all the tribes of Israel to build
an house in, that my name might be there; neither chose I any man to
be a ruler over my people Israel: 6:6 But I have chosen Jerusalem,
that my name might be there; and have chosen David to be over my
people Israel.

6:7 Now it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for
the name of the LORD God of Israel.

6:8 But the LORD said to David my father, Forasmuch as it was in thine
heart to build an house for my name, thou didst well in that it was in
thine heart: 6:9 Notwithstanding thou shalt not build the house; but
thy son which shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the
house for my name.

6:10 The LORD therefore hath performed his word that he hath spoken:
for I am risen up in the room of David my father, and am set on the
throne of Israel, as the LORD promised, and have built the house for
the name of the LORD God of Israel.

6:11 And in it have I put the ark, wherein is the covenant of the
LORD, that he made with the children of Israel.

6:12 And he stood before the altar of the LORD in the presence of all
the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands: 6:13 For
Solomon had made a brasen scaffold of five cubits long, and five
cubits broad, and three cubits high, and had set it in the midst of
the court: and upon it he stood, and kneeled down upon his knees
before all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands
toward heaven.

6:14 And said, O LORD God of Israel, there is no God like thee in the
heaven, nor in the earth; which keepest covenant, and shewest mercy
unto thy servants, that walk before thee with all their hearts: 6:15
Thou which hast kept with thy servant David my father that which thou
hast promised him; and spakest with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled it
with thine hand, as it is this day.

6:16 Now therefore, O LORD God of Israel, keep with thy servant David
my father that which thou hast promised him, saying, There shall not
fail thee a man in my sight to sit upon the throne of Israel; yet so
that thy children take heed to their way to walk in my law, as thou
hast walked before me.

6:17 Now then, O LORD God of Israel, let thy word be verified, which
thou hast spoken unto thy servant David.

6:18 But will God in very deed dwell with men on the earth? behold,
heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less
this house which I have built!  6:19 Have respect therefore to the
prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, O LORD my God, to
hearken unto the cry and the prayer which thy servant prayeth before
thee: 6:20 That thine eyes may be open upon this house day and night,
upon the place whereof thou hast said that thou wouldest put thy name
there; to hearken unto the prayer which thy servant prayeth toward
this place.

6:21 Hearken therefore unto the supplications of thy servant, and of
thy people Israel, which they shall make toward this place: hear thou
from thy dwelling place, even from heaven; and when thou hearest,
forgive.

6:22 If a man sin against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him
to make him swear, and the oath come before thine altar in this house;
6:23 Then hear thou from heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, by
requiting the wicked, by recompensing his way upon his own head; and
by justifying the righteous, by giving him according to his
righteousness.

6:24 And if thy people Israel be put to the worse before the enemy,
because they have sinned against thee; and shall return and confess
thy name, and pray and make supplication before thee in this house;
6:25 Then hear thou from the heavens, and forgive the sin of thy
people Israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest to
them and to their fathers.

6:26 When the heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they
have sinned against thee; yet if they pray toward this place, and
confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou dost afflict
them; 6:27 Then hear thou from heaven, and forgive the sin of thy
servants, and of thy people Israel, when thou hast taught them the
good way, wherein they should walk; and send rain upon thy land, which
thou hast given unto thy people for an inheritance.

6:28 If there be dearth in the land, if there be pestilence, if there
be blasting, or mildew, locusts, or caterpillers; if their enemies
besiege them in the cities of their land; whatsoever sore or
whatsoever sickness there be: 6:29 Then what prayer or what
supplication soever shall be made of any man, or of all thy people
Israel, when every one shall know his own sore and his own grief, and
shall spread forth his hands in this house: 6:30 Then hear thou from
heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and render unto every man
according unto all his ways, whose heart thou knowest; (for thou only
knowest the hearts of the children of men:) 6:31 That they may fear
thee, to walk in thy ways, so long as they live in the land which thou
gavest unto our fathers.

6:32 Moreover concerning the stranger, which is not of thy people
Israel, but is come from a far country for thy great name's sake, and
thy mighty hand, and thy stretched out arm; if they come and pray in
this house; 6:33 Then hear thou from the heavens, even from thy
dwelling place, and do according to all that the stranger calleth to
thee for; that all people of the earth may know thy name, and fear
thee, as doth thy people Israel, and may know that this house which I
have built is called by thy name.

6:34 If thy people go out to war against their enemies by the way that
thou shalt send them, and they pray unto thee toward this city which
thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name; 6:35
Then hear thou from the heavens their prayer and their supplication,
and maintain their cause.

6:36 If they sin against thee, (for there is no man which sinneth
not,) and thou be angry with them, and deliver them over before their
enemies, and they carry them away captives unto a land far off or
near; 6:37 Yet if they bethink themselves in the land whither they are
carried captive, and turn and pray unto thee in the land of their
captivity, saying, We have sinned, we have done amiss, and have dealt
wickedly; 6:38 If they return to thee with all their heart and with
all their soul in the land of their captivity, whither they have
carried them captives, and pray toward their land, which thou gavest
unto their fathers, and toward the city which thou hast chosen, and
toward the house which I have built for thy name: 6:39 Then hear thou
from the heavens, even from thy dwelling place, their prayer and their
supplications, and maintain their cause, and forgive thy people which
have sinned against thee.

6:40 Now, my God, let, I beseech thee, thine eyes be open, and let
thine ears be attent unto the prayer that is made in this place.

6:41 Now therefore arise, O LORD God, into thy resting place, thou,
and the ark of thy strength: let thy priests, O LORD God, be clothed
with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness.

6:42 O LORD God, turn not away the face of thine anointed: remember
the mercies of David thy servant.

7:1 Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down
from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices; and
the glory of the LORD filled the house.

7:2 And the priests could not enter into the house of the LORD,
because the glory of the LORD had filled the LORD's house.

7:3 And when all the children of Israel saw how the fire came down,
and the glory of the LORD upon the house, they bowed themselves with
their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped, and
praised the LORD, saying, For he is good; for his mercy endureth for
ever.

7:4 Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before the
LORD.

7:5 And king Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty and two thousand
oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep: so the king and all
the people dedicated the house of God.

7:6 And the priests waited on their offices: the Levites also with
instruments of musick of the LORD, which David the king had made to
praise the LORD, because his mercy endureth for ever, when David
praised by their ministry; and the priests sounded trumpets before
them, and all Israel stood.

7:7 Moreover Solomon hallowed the middle of the court that was before
the house of the LORD: for there he offered burnt offerings, and the
fat of the peace offerings, because the brasen altar which Solomon had
made was not able to receive the burnt offerings, and the meat
offerings, and the fat.

7:8 Also at the same time Solomon kept the feast seven days, and all
Israel with him, a very great congregation, from the entering in of
Hamath unto the river of Egypt.

7:9 And in the eighth day they made a solemn assembly: for they kept
the dedication of the altar seven days, and the feast seven days.

7:10 And on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent
the people away into their tents, glad and merry in heart for the
goodness that the LORD had shewed unto David, and to Solomon, and to
Israel his people.

7:11 Thus Solomon finished the house of the LORD, and the king's
house: and all that came into Solomon's heart to make in the house of
the LORD, and in his own house, he prosperously effected.

7:12 And the LORD appeared to Solomon by night, and said unto him, I
have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place to myself for an
house of sacrifice.

7:13 If I shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if I command the
locusts to devour the land, or if I send pestilence among my people;
7:14 If my people, which are called by my name, shall humble
themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked
ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and
will heal their land.

7:15 Now mine eyes shall be open, and mine ears attent unto the prayer
that is made in this place.

7:16 For now have I chosen and sanctified this house, that my name may
be there for ever: and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there
perpetually.

7:17 And as for thee, if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father
walked, and do according to all that I have commanded thee, and shalt
observe my statutes and my judgments; 7:18 Then will I stablish the
throne of thy kingdom, according as I have covenanted with David thy
father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man to be ruler in Israel.

7:19 But if ye turn away, and forsake my statutes and my commandments,
which I have set before you, and shall go and serve other gods, and
worship them; 7:20 Then will I pluck them up by the roots out of my
land which I have given them; and this house, which I have sanctified
for my name, will I cast out of my sight, and will make it to be a
proverb and a byword among all nations.

7:21 And this house, which is high, shall be an astonishment to every
one that passeth by it; so that he shall say, Why hath the LORD done
thus unto this land, and unto this house?  7:22 And it shall be
answered, Because they forsook the LORD God of their fathers, which
brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold on other
gods, and worshipped them, and served them: therefore hath he brought
all this evil upon them.

8:1 And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, wherein Solomon
had built the house of the LORD, and his own house, 8:2 That the
cities which Huram had restored to Solomon, Solomon built them, and
caused the children of Israel to dwell there.

8:3 And Solomon went to Hamathzobah, and prevailed against it.

8:4 And he built Tadmor in the wilderness, and all the store cities,
which he built in Hamath.

8:5 Also he built Bethhoron the upper, and Bethhoron the nether,
fenced cities, with walls, gates, and bars; 8:6 And Baalath, and all
the store cities that Solomon had, and all the chariot cities, and the
cities of the horsemen, and all that Solomon desired to build in
Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and throughout all the land of his
dominion.

8:7 As for all the people that were left of the Hittites, and the
Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites,
which were not of Israel, 8:8 But of their children, who were left
after them in the land, whom the children of Israel consumed not, them
did Solomon make to pay tribute until this day.

8:9 But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no servants for his
work; but they were men of war, and chief of his captains, and
captains of his chariots and horsemen.

8:10 And these were the chief of king Solomon's officers, even two
hundred and fifty, that bare rule over the people.

8:11 And Solomon brought up the daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of
David unto the house that he had built for her: for he said, My wife
shall not dwell in the house of David king of Israel, because the
places are holy, whereunto the ark of the LORD hath come.

8:12 Then Solomon offered burnt offerings unto the LORD on the altar
of the LORD, which he had built before the porch, 8:13 Even after a
certain rate every day, offering according to the commandment of
Moses, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn
feasts, three times in the year, even in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.

8:14 And he appointed, according to the order of David his father, the
courses of the priests to their service, and the Levites to their
charges, to praise and minister before the priests, as the duty of
every day required: the porters also by their courses at every gate:
for so had David the man of God commanded.

8:15 And they departed not from the commandment of the king unto the
priests and Levites concerning any matter, or concerning the
treasures.

8:16 Now all the work of Solomon was prepared unto the day of the
foundation of the house of the LORD, and until it was finished. So the
house of the LORD was perfected.

8:17 Then went Solomon to Eziongeber, and to Eloth, at the sea side in
the land of Edom.

8:18 And Huram sent him by the hands of his servants ships, and
servants that had knowledge of the sea; and they went with the
servants of Solomon to Ophir, and took thence four hundred and fifty
talents of gold, and brought them to king Solomon.

9:1 And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came
to prove Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem, with a very great
company, and camels that bare spices, and gold in abundance, and
precious stones: and when she was come to Solomon, she communed with
him of all that was in her heart.

9:2 And Solomon told her all her questions: and there was nothing hid
from Solomon which he told her not.

9:3 And when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, and
the house that he had built, 9:4 And the meat of his table, and the
sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and
their apparel; his cupbearers also, and their apparel; and his ascent
by which he went up into the house of the LORD; there was no more
spirit in her.

9:5 And she said to the king, It was a true report which I heard in
mine own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom: 9:6 Howbeit I believed
not their words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it: and, behold,
the one half of the greatness of thy wisdom was not told me: for thou
exceedest the fame that I heard.

9:7 Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants, which stand
continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom.

9:8 Blessed be the LORD thy God, which delighted in thee to set thee
on his throne, to be king for the LORD thy God: because thy God loved
Israel, to establish them for ever, therefore made he thee king over
them, to do judgment and justice.

9:9 And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and
