of spices great abundance, and precious stones: neither was there any
such spice as the queen of Sheba gave king Solomon.

9:10 And the servants also of Huram, and the servants of Solomon,
which brought gold from Ophir, brought algum trees and precious
stones.

9:11 And the king made of the algum trees terraces to the house of the
LORD, and to the king's palace, and harps and psalteries for singers:
and there were none such seen before in the land of Judah.

9:12 And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire,
whatsoever she asked, beside that which she had brought unto the king.
So she turned, and went away to her own land, she and her servants.

9:13 Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six
hundred and threescore and six talents of gold; 9:14 Beside that which
chapmen and merchants brought. And all the kings of Arabia and
governors of the country brought gold and silver to Solomon.

9:15 And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six
hundred shekels of beaten gold went to one target.

9:16 And three hundred shields made he of beaten gold: three hundred
shekels of gold went to one shield. And the king put them in the house
of the forest of Lebanon.

9:17 Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it
with pure gold.

9:18 And there were six steps to the throne, with a footstool of gold,
which were fastened to the throne, and stays on each side of the
sitting place, and two lions standing by the stays: 9:19 And twelve
lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps.
There was not the like made in any kingdom.

9:20 And all the drinking vessels of king Solomon were of gold, and
all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure
gold: none were of silver; it was not any thing accounted of in the
days of Solomon.

9:21 For the king's ships went to Tarshish with the servants of Huram:
every three years once came the ships of Tarshish bringing gold, and
silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

9:22 And king Solomon passed all the kings of the earth in riches and
wisdom.

9:23 And all the kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to
hear his wisdom, that God had put in his heart.

9:24 And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and
vessels of gold, and raiment, harness, and spices, horses, and mules,
a rate year by year.

9:25 And Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and
twelve thousand horsemen; whom he bestowed in the chariot cities, and
with the king at Jerusalem.

9:26 And he reigned over all the kings from the river even unto the
land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt.

9:27 And the king made silver in Jerusalem as stones, and cedar trees
made he as the sycomore trees that are in the low plains in abundance.

9:28 And they brought unto Solomon horses out of Egypt, and out of all
lands.

9:29 Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, are they not
written in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of
Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions of Iddo the seer against
Jeroboam the son of Nebat?  9:30 And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over
all Israel forty years.

9:31 And Solomon slept with his fathers, and he was buried in the city
of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.

10:1 And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for to Shechem were all Israel come
to make him king.

10:2 And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who was in
Egypt, whither he fled from the presence of Solomon the king, heard
it, that Jeroboam returned out of Egypt.

10:3 And they sent and called him. So Jeroboam and all Israel came and
spake to Rehoboam, saying, 10:4 Thy father made our yoke grievous: now
therefore ease thou somewhat the grievous servitude of thy father, and
his heavy yoke that he put upon us, and we will serve thee.

10:5 And he said unto them, Come again unto me after three days. And
the people departed.

10:6 And king Rehoboam took counsel with the old men that had stood
before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, What counsel
give ye me to return answer to this people?  10:7 And they spake unto
him, saying, If thou be kind to this people, and please them, and
speak good words to them, they will be thy servants for ever.

10:8 But he forsook the counsel which the old men gave him, and took
counsel with the young men that were brought up with him, that stood
before him.

10:9 And he said unto them, What advice give ye that we may return
answer to this people, which have spoken to me, saying, Ease somewhat
the yoke that thy father did put upon us?  10:10 And the young men
that were brought up with him spake unto him, saying, Thus shalt thou
answer the people that spake unto thee, saying, Thy father made our
yoke heavy, but make thou it somewhat lighter for us; thus shalt thou
say unto them, My little finger shall be thicker than my father's
loins.

10:11 For whereas my father put a heavy yoke upon you, I will put more
to your yoke: my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise
you with scorpions.

10:12 So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam on the third
day, as the king bade, saying, Come again to me on the third day.

10:13 And the king answered them roughly; and king Rehoboam forsook
the counsel of the old men, 10:14 And answered them after the advice
of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, but I will
add thereto: my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise
you with scorpions.

10:15 So the king hearkened not unto the people: for the cause was of
God, that the LORD might perform his word, which he spake by the hand
of Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

10:16 And when all Israel saw that the king would not hearken unto
them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in
David?  and we have none inheritance in the son of Jesse: every man to
your tents, O Israel: and now, David, see to thine own house. So all
Israel went to their tents.

10:17 But as for the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities of
Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.

10:18 Then king Rehoboam sent Hadoram that was over the tribute; and
the children of Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. But king
Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to
Jerusalem.

10:19 And Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.

11:1 And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he gathered of the house
of Judah and Benjamin an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men,
which were warriors, to fight against Israel, that he might bring the
kingdom again to Rehoboam.

11:2 But the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying,
11:3 Speak unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all
Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying, 11:4 Thus saith the LORD, Ye
shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren: return every man to
his house: for this thing is done of me. And they obeyed the words of
the LORD, and returned from going against Jeroboam.

11:5 And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built cities for defence in
Judah.

11:6 He built even Bethlehem, and Etam, and Tekoa, 11:7 And Bethzur,
and Shoco, and Adullam, 11:8 And Gath, and Mareshah, and Ziph, 11:9
And Adoraim, and Lachish, and Azekah, 11:10 And Zorah, and Aijalon,
and Hebron, which are in Judah and in Benjamin fenced cities.

11:11 And he fortified the strong holds, and put captains in them, and
store of victual, and of oil and wine.

11:12 And in every several city he put shields and spears, and made
them exceeding strong, having Judah and Benjamin on his side.

11:13 And the priests and the Levites that were in all Israel resorted
to him out of all their coasts.

11:14 For the Levites left their suburbs and their possession, and
came to Judah and Jerusalem: for Jeroboam and his sons had cast them
off from executing the priest's office unto the LORD: 11:15 And he
ordained him priests for the high places, and for the devils, and for
the calves which he had made.

11:16 And after them out of all the tribes of Israel such as set their
hearts to seek the LORD God of Israel came to Jerusalem, to sacrifice
unto the LORD God of their fathers.

11:17 So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam the
son of Solomon strong, three years: for three years they walked in the
way of David and Solomon.

11:18 And Rehoboam took him Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the son
of David to wife, and Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse;
11:19 Which bare him children; Jeush, and Shamariah, and Zaham.

11:20 And after her he took Maachah the daughter of Absalom; which
bare him Abijah, and Attai, and Ziza, and Shelomith.

11:21 And Rehoboam loved Maachah the daughter of Absalom above all his
wives and his concubines: (for he took eighteen wives, and threescore
concubines; and begat twenty and eight sons, and threescore
daughters.)  11:22 And Rehoboam made Abijah the son of Maachah the
chief, to be ruler among his brethren: for he thought to make him
king.

11:23 And he dealt wisely, and dispersed of all his children
throughout all the countries of Judah and Benjamin, unto every fenced
city: and he gave them victual in abundance. And he desired many
wives.

12:1 And it came to pass, when Rehoboam had established the kingdom,
and had strengthened himself, he forsook the law of the LORD, and all
Israel with him.

12:2 And it came to pass, that in the fifth year of king Rehoboam
Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had
transgressed against the LORD, 12:3 With twelve hundred chariots, and
threescore thousand horsemen: and the people were without number that
came with him out of Egypt; the Lubims, the Sukkiims, and the
Ethiopians.

12:4 And he took the fenced cities which pertained to Judah, and came
to Jerusalem.

12:5 Then came Shemaiah the prophet to Rehoboam, and to the princes of
Judah, that were gathered together to Jerusalem because of Shishak,
and said unto them, Thus saith the LORD, Ye have forsaken me, and
therefore have I also left you in the hand of Shishak.

12:6 Whereupon the princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves;
and they said, The LORD is righteous.

12:7 And when the LORD saw that they humbled themselves, the word of
the LORD came to Shemaiah, saying, They have humbled themselves;
therefore I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some
deliverance; and my wrath shall not be poured out upon Jerusalem by
the hand of Shishak.

12:8 Nevertheless they shall be his servants; that they may know my
service, and the service of the kingdoms of the countries.

12:9 So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took away
the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the
king's house; he took all: he carried away also the shields of gold
which Solomon had made.

12:10 Instead of which king Rehoboam made shields of brass, and
committed them to the hands of the chief of the guard, that kept the
entrance of the king's house.

12:11 And when the king entered into the house of the LORD, the guard
came and fetched them, and brought them again into the guard chamber.

12:12 And when he humbled himself, the wrath of the LORD turned from
him, that he would not destroy him altogether: and also in Judah
things went well.

12:13 So king Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem, and reigned:
for Rehoboam was one and forty years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the LORD had
chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his
mother's name was Naamah an Ammonitess.

12:14 And he did evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the
LORD.

12:15 Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, are they not written
in the book of Shemaiah the prophet, and of Iddo the seer concerning
genealogies? And there were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam
continually.

12:16 And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city
of David: and Abijah his son reigned in his stead.

13:1 Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam began Abijah to reign
over Judah.

13:2 He reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was
Michaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war between
Abijah and Jeroboam.

13:3 And Abijah set the battle in array with an army of valiant men of
war, even four hundred thousand chosen men: Jeroboam also set the
battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men,
being mighty men of valour.

13:4 And Abijah stood up upon mount Zemaraim, which is in mount
Ephraim, and said, Hear me, thou Jeroboam, and all Israel; 13:5 Ought
ye not to know that the LORD God of Israel gave the kingdom over
Israel to David for ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of
salt?  13:6 Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the
son of David, is risen up, and hath rebelled against his lord.

13:7 And there are gathered unto him vain men, the children of Belial,
and have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of Solomon,
when Rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand
them.

13:8 And now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the LORD in the hand
of the sons of David; and ye be a great multitude, and there are with
your golden calves, which Jeroboam made you for gods.

13:9 Have ye not cast out the priests of the LORD, the sons of Aaron,
and the Levites, and have made you priests after the manner of the
nations of other lands? so that whosoever cometh to consecrate himself
with a young bullock and seven rams, the same may be a priest of them
that are no gods.

13:10 But as for us, the LORD is our God, and we have not forsaken
him; and the priests, which minister unto the LORD, are the sons of
Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business: 13:11 And they burn
unto the LORD every morning and every evening burnt sacrifices and
sweet incense: the shewbread also set they in order upon the pure
table; and the candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof, to burn
every evening: for we keep the charge of the LORD our God; but ye have
forsaken him.

13:12 And, behold, God himself is with us for our captain, and his
priests with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you. O children of
Israel, fight ye not against the LORD God of your fathers; for ye
shall not prosper.

13:13 But Jeroboam caused an ambushment to come about behind them: so
they were before Judah, and the ambushment was behind them.

13:14 And when Judah looked back, behold, the battle was before and
behind: and they cried unto the LORD, and the priests sounded with the
trumpets.

13:15 Then the men of Judah gave a shout: and as the men of Judah
shouted, it came to pass, that God smote Jeroboam and all Israel
before Abijah and Judah.

13:16 And the children of Israel fled before Judah: and God delivered
them into their hand.

13:17 And Abijah and his people slew them with a great slaughter: so
there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men.

13:18 Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time, and
the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the LORD God
of their fathers.

13:19 And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him,
Bethel with the towns thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns thereof,
and Ephraim with the towns thereof.

13:20 Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of
Abijah: and the LORD struck him, and he died.

13:21 But Abijah waxed mighty, and married fourteen wives, and begat
twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters.

13:22 And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his
sayings, are written in the story of the prophet Iddo.

14:1 So Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city
of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead. In his days the land
was quiet ten years.

14:2 And Asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of the LORD
his God: 14:3 For he took away the altars of the strange gods, and the
high places, and brake down the images, and cut down the groves: 14:4
And commanded Judah to seek the LORD God of their fathers, and to do
the law and the commandment.

14:5 Also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places
and the images: and the kingdom was quiet before him.

14:6 And he built fenced cities in Judah: for the land had rest, and
he had no war in those years; because the LORD had given him rest.

14:7 Therefore he said unto Judah, Let us build these cities, and make
about them walls, and towers, gates, and bars, while the land is yet
before us; because we have sought the LORD our God, we have sought
him, and he hath given us rest on every side. So they built and
prospered.

14:8 And Asa had an army of men that bare targets and spears, out of
Judah three hundred thousand; and out of Benjamin, that bare shields
and drew bows, two hundred and fourscore thousand: all these were
mighty men of valour.

14:9 And there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian with an host
of a thousand thousand, and three hundred chariots; and came unto
Mareshah.

14:10 Then Asa went out against him, and they set the battle in array
in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah.

14:11 And Asa cried unto the LORD his God, and said, LORD, it is
nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have
no power: help us, O LORD our God; for we rest on thee, and in thy
name we go against this multitude. O LORD, thou art our God; let no
man prevail against thee.

14:12 So the LORD smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah;
and the Ethiopians fled.

14:13 And Asa and the people that were with him pursued them unto
Gerar: and the Ethiopians were overthrown, that they could not recover
themselves; for they were destroyed before the LORD, and before his
host; and they carried away very much spoil.

14:14 And they smote all the cities round about Gerar; for the fear of
the LORD came upon them: and they spoiled all the cities; for there
was exceeding much spoil in them.

14:15 They smote also the tents of cattle, and carried away sheep and
camels in abundance, and returned to Jerusalem.

15:1 And the Spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded: 15:2 And
he went out to meet Asa, and said unto him, Hear ye me, Asa, and all
Judah and Benjamin; The LORD is with you, while ye be with him; and if
ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will
forsake you.

15:3 Now for a long season Israel hath been without the true God, and
without a teaching priest, and without law.

15:4 But when they in their trouble did turn unto the LORD God of
Israel, and sought him, he was found of them.

15:5 And in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor
to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants
of the countries.

15:6 And nation was destroyed of nation, and city of city: for God did
vex them with all adversity.

15:7 Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak: for your
work shall be rewarded.

15:8 And when Asa heard these words, and the prophecy of Oded the
prophet, he took courage, and put away the abominable idols out of all
the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities which he had
taken from mount Ephraim, and renewed the altar of the LORD, that was
before the porch of the LORD.

15:9 And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with
them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon: for they fell to
him out of Israel in abundance, when they saw that the LORD his God
was with him.

15:10 So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third
month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa.

15:11 And they offered unto the LORD the same time, of the spoil which
they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep.

15:12 And they entered into a covenant to seek the LORD God of their
fathers with all their heart and with all their soul; 15:13 That
whosoever would not seek the LORD God of Israel should be put to
death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.

15:14 And they sware unto the LORD with a loud voice, and with
shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets.

15:15 And all Judah rejoiced at the oath: for they had sworn with all
their heart, and sought him with their whole desire; and he was found
of them: and the LORD gave them rest round about.

15:16 And also concerning Maachah the mother of Asa the king, he
removed her from being queen, because she had made an idol in a grove:
and Asa cut down her idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook
Kidron.

15:17 But the high places were not taken away out of Israel:
nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days.

15:18 And he brought into the house of God the things that his father
had dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated, silver, and gold,
and vessels.

15:19 And there was no more war unto the five and thirtieth year of
the reign of Asa.

16:1 In the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa Baasha king of
Israel came up against Judah, and built Ramah, to the intent that he
might let none go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.

16:2 Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the
house of the LORD and of the king's house, and sent to Benhadad king
of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying, 16:3 There is a league
between me and thee, as there was between my father and thy father:
behold, I have sent thee silver and gold; go, break thy league with
Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me.

16:4 And Benhadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of
his armies against the cities of Israel; and they smote Ijon, and Dan,
and Abelmaim, and all the store cities of Naphtali.

16:5 And it came to pass, when Baasha heard it, that he left off
building of Ramah, and let his work cease.

16:6 Then Asa the king took all Judah; and they carried away the
stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasha was
building; and he built therewith Geba and Mizpah.

16:7 And at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah, and
said unto him, Because thou hast relied on the king of Syria, and not
relied on the LORD thy God, therefore is the host of the king of Syria
escaped out of thine hand.

16:8 Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, with very
many chariots and horsemen? yet, because thou didst rely on the LORD,
he delivered them into thine hand.

16:9 For the eyes of the LORD run to and fro throughout the whole
earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is
perfect toward him. Herein thou hast done foolishly: therefore from
henceforth thou shalt have wars.

16:10 Then Asa was wroth with the seer, and put him in a prison house;
for he was in a rage with him because of this thing. And Asa oppressed
some of the people the same time.

16:11 And, behold, the acts of Asa, first and last, lo, they are
written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.

16:12 And Asa in the thirty and ninth year of his reign was diseased
in his feet, until his disease was exceeding great: yet in his disease
he sought not to the LORD, but to the physicians.

16:13 And Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the one and fortieth
year of his reign.

16:14 And they buried him in his own sepulchres, which he had made for
himself in the city of David, and laid him in the bed which was filled
with sweet odours and divers kinds of spices prepared by the
apothecaries' art: and they made a very great burning for him.

17:1 And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and strengthened
himself against Israel.

17:2 And he placed forces in all the fenced cities of Judah, and set
garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the cities of Ephraim, which
Asa his father had taken.

17:3 And the LORD was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first
ways of his father David, and sought not unto Baalim; 17:4 But sought
to the Lord God of his father, and walked in his commandments, and not
after the doings of Israel.

17:5 Therefore the LORD stablished the kingdom in his hand; and all
Judah brought to Jehoshaphat presents; and he had riches and honour in
abundance.

17:6 And his heart was lifted up in the ways of the LORD: moreover he
took away the high places and groves out of Judah.

17:7 Also in the third year of his reign he sent to his princes, even
to Benhail, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariah, and to Nethaneel, and to
Michaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah.

17:8 And with them he sent Levites, even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and
Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah,
and Tobijah, and Tobadonijah, Levites; and with them Elishama and
Jehoram, priests.

17:9 And they taught in Judah, and had the book of the law of the LORD
with them, and went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and
taught the people.

17:10 And the fear of the LORD fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands
that were round about Judah, so that they made no war against
Jehoshaphat.

17:11 Also some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents, and
tribute silver; and the Arabians brought him flocks, seven thousand
and seven hundred rams, and seven thousand and seven hundred he goats.

17:12 And Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly; and he built in Judah
castles, and cities of store.

17:13 And he had much business in the cities of Judah: and the men of
war, mighty men of valour, were in Jerusalem.

17:14 And these are the numbers of them according to the house of
their fathers: Of Judah, the captains of thousands; Adnah the chief,
and with him mighty men of valour three hundred thousand.

17:15 And next to him was Jehohanan the captain, and with him two
hundred and fourscore thousand.

17:16 And next him was Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly
offered himself unto the LORD; and with him two hundred thousand
mighty men of valour.

17:17 And of Benjamin; Eliada a mighty man of valour, and with him
armed men with bow and shield two hundred thousand.

17:18 And next him was Jehozabad, and with him an hundred and
fourscore thousand ready prepared for the war.

17:19 These waited on the king, beside those whom the king put in the
fenced cities throughout all Judah.

18:1 Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honour in abundance, and joined
affinity with Ahab.

18:2 And after certain years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab
killed sheep and oxen for him in abundance, and for the people that he
had with him, and persuaded him to go up with him to Ramothgilead.

18:3 And Ahab king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Wilt
thou go with me to Ramothgilead? And he answered him, I am as thou
art, and my people as thy people; and we will be with thee in the war.

18:4 And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray
thee, at the word of the LORD to day.

18:5 Therefore the king of Israel gathered together of prophets four
hundred men, and said unto them, Shall we go to Ramothgilead to
battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for God will deliver
it into the king's hand.

18:6 But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the LORD
besides, that we might enquire of him?  18:7 And the king of Israel
said unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, by whom we may enquire of
the LORD: but I hate him; for he never prophesied good unto me, but
always evil: the same is Micaiah the son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat
said, Let not the king say so.

18:8 And the king of Israel called for one of his officers, and said,
Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imla.

18:9 And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah sat either
of them on his throne, clothed in their robes, and they sat in a void
place at the entering in of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets
prophesied before them.

18:10 And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah had made him horns of iron,
and said, Thus saith the LORD, With these thou shalt push Syria until
they be consumed.

18:11 And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to
Ramothgilead, and prosper: for the LORD shall deliver it into the hand
of the king.

18:12 And the messenger that went to call Micaiah spake to him,
saying, Behold, the words of the prophets declare good to the king
with one assent; let thy word therefore, I pray thee, be like one of
their's, and speak thou good.

18:13 And Micaiah said, As the LORD liveth, even what my God saith,
that will I speak.

18:14 And when he was come to the king, the king said unto him,
Micaiah, shall we go to Ramothgilead to battle, or shall I forbear?
And he said, Go ye up, and prosper, and they shall be delivered into
your hand.

18:15 And the king said to him, How many times shall I adjure thee
that thou say nothing but the truth to me in the name of the LORD?
18:16 Then he said, I did see all Israel scattered upon the mountains,
as sheep that have no shepherd: and the LORD said, These have no
master; let them return therefore every man to his house in peace.

18:17 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee
that he would not prophesy good unto me, but evil?  18:18 Again he
said, Therefore hear the word of the LORD; I saw the LORD sitting upon
his throne, and all the host of heaven standing on his right hand and
on his left.

18:19 And the LORD said, Who shall entice Ahab king of Israel, that he
may go up and fall at Ramothgilead? And one spake saying after this
manner, and another saying after that manner.

18:20 Then there came out a spirit, and stood before the LORD, and
said, I will entice him. And the LORD said unto him, Wherewith?  18:21
And he said, I will go out, and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all
his prophets. And the Lord said, Thou shalt entice him, and thou shalt
also prevail: go out, and do even so.

18:22 Now therefore, behold, the LORD hath put a lying spirit in the
mouth of these thy prophets, and the LORD hath spoken evil against
thee.

18:23 Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near, and smote Micaiah
upon the cheek, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the LORD from
me to speak unto thee?  18:24 And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt see
on that day when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.

18:25 Then the king of Israel said, Take ye Micaiah, and carry him
back to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king's son;
18:26 And say, Thus saith the king, Put this fellow in the prison, and
feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until
I return in peace.

18:27 And Micaiah said, If thou certainly return in peace, then hath
not the LORD spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, all ye people.

18:28 So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up
to Ramothgilead.

18:29 And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise
myself, and I will go to the battle; but put thou on thy robes. So the
king of Israel disguised himself; and they went to the battle.

18:30 Now the king of Syria had commanded the captains of the chariots
that were with him, saying, Fight ye not with small or great, save
only with the king of Israel.

18:31 And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw
Jehoshaphat, that they said, It is the king of Israel. Therefore they
compassed about him to fight: but Jehoshaphat cried out, and the LORD
helped him; and God moved them to depart from him.

18:32 For it came to pass, that, when the captains of the chariots
perceived that it was not the king of Israel, they turned back again
from pursuing him.

18:33 And a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of
Israel between the joints of the harness: therefore he said to his
chariot man, Turn thine hand, that thou mayest carry me out of the
host; for I am wounded.

18:34 And the battle increased that day: howbeit the king of Israel
stayed himself up in his chariot against the Syrians until the even:
and about the time of the sun going down he died.

19:1 And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace
to Jerusalem.

19:2 And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him, and
said to king Jehoshaphat, Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love
them that hate the LORD? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the
LORD.

19:3 Nevertheless there are good things found in thee, in that thou
hast taken away the groves out of the land, and hast prepared thine
heart to seek God.

19:4 And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem: and he went out again through
the people from Beersheba to mount Ephraim, and brought them back unto
the LORD God of their fathers.

19:5 And he set judges in the land throughout all the fenced cities of
Judah, city by city, 19:6 And said to the judges, Take heed what ye
do: for ye judge not for man, but for the LORD, who is with you in the
judgment.

19:7 Wherefore now let the fear of the LORD be upon you; take heed and
do it: for there is no iniquity with the LORD our God, nor respect of
persons, nor taking of gifts.

19:8 Moreover in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of
the priests, and of the chief of the fathers of Israel, for the
judgment of the LORD, and for controversies, when they returned to
Jerusalem.

19:9 And he charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the
LORD, faithfully, and with a perfect heart.

19:10 And what cause soever shall come to you of your brethren that
dwell in your cities, between blood and blood, between law and
commandment, statutes and judgments, ye shall even warn them that they
trespass not against the LORD, and so wrath come upon you, and upon
your brethren: this do, and ye shall not trespass.

19:11 And, behold, Amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters
of the LORD; and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house
of Judah, for all the king's matters: also the Levites shall be
officers before you. Deal courageously, and the LORD shall be with the
good.

20:1 It came to pass after this also, that the children of Moab, and
the children of Ammon, and with them other beside the Ammonites, came
against Jehoshaphat to battle.

20:2 Then there came some that told Jehoshaphat, saying, There cometh
a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea on this side Syria;
and, behold, they be in Hazazontamar, which is Engedi.

20:3 And Jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek the LORD, and
proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.

20:4 And Judah gathered themselves together, to ask help of the LORD:
even out of all the cities of Judah they came to seek the LORD.

20:5 And Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem,
in the house of the LORD, before the new court, 20:6 And said, O LORD
God of our fathers, art not thou God in heaven? and rulest not thou
over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand is there not
power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee?  20:7 Art not
thou our God, who didst drive out the inhabitants of this land before
thy people Israel, and gavest it to the seed of Abraham thy friend for
ever?  20:8 And they dwelt therein, and have built thee a sanctuary
therein for thy name, saying, 20:9 If, when evil cometh upon us, as
the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand before this
house, and in thy presence, (for thy name is in this house,) and cry
unto thee in our affliction, then thou wilt hear and help.

20:10 And now, behold, the children of Ammon and Moab and mount Seir,
whom thou wouldest not let Israel invade, when they came out of the
land of Egypt, but they turned from them, and destroyed them not;
20:11 Behold, I say, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy
possession, which thou hast given us to inherit.

20:12 O our God, wilt thou not judge them? for we have no might
against this great company that cometh against us; neither know we
what to do: but our eyes are upon thee.

20:13 And all Judah stood before the LORD, with their little ones,
their wives, and their children.

20:14 Then upon Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the
son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, a Levite of the sons of Asaph,
came the Spirit of the LORD in the midst of the congregation; 20:15
And he said, Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and thou king Jehoshaphat, Thus saith the LORD unto you, Be not afraid
nor dismayed by reason of this great multitude; for the battle is not
yours, but God's.

20:16 To morrow go ye down against them: behold, they come up by the
cliff of Ziz; and ye shall find them at the end of the brook, before
the wilderness of Jeruel.

20:17 Ye shall not need to fight in this battle: set yourselves, stand
ye still, and see the salvation of the LORD with you, O Judah and
Jerusalem: fear not, nor be dismayed; to morrow go out against them:
for the LORD will be with you.

20:18 And Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his face to the ground: and
all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell before the LORD,
worshipping the LORD.

20:19 And the Levites, of the children of the Kohathites, and of the
children of the Korhites, stood up to praise the LORD God of Israel
with a loud voice on high.

20:20 And they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the
wilderness of Tekoa: and as they went forth, Jehoshaphat stood and
said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem; Believe in
the LORD your God, so shall ye be established; believe his prophets,
so shall ye prosper.

20:21 And when he had consulted with the people, he appointed singers
unto the LORD, and that should praise the beauty of holiness, as they
went out before the army, and to say, Praise the LORD; for his mercy
endureth for ever.

20:22 And when they began to sing and to praise, the LORD set
ambushments against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, which
were come against Judah; and they were smitten.

20:23 For the children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the
inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy them: and when
they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to
destroy another.

20:24 And when Judah came toward the watch tower in the wilderness,
they looked unto the multitude, and, behold, they were dead bodies
fallen to the earth, and none escaped.

20:25 And when Jehoshaphat and his people came to take away the spoil
of them, they found among them in abundance both riches with the dead
bodies, and precious jewels, which they stripped off for themselves,
more than they could carry away: and they were three days in gathering
of the spoil, it was so much.

20:26 And on the fourth day they assembled themselves in the valley of
Berachah; for there they blessed the LORD: therefore the name of the
same place was called, The valley of Berachah, unto this day.

20:27 Then they returned, every man of Judah and Jerusalem, and
Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to Jerusalem with
joy; for the LORD had made them to rejoice over their enemies.

20:28 And they came to Jerusalem with psalteries and harps and
trumpets unto the house of the LORD.

20:29 And the fear of God was on all the kingdoms of those countries,
when they had heard that the LORD fought against the enemies of
Israel.

20:30 So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet: for his God gave him rest
round about.

20:31 And Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah: he was thirty and five years
old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and five years in
Jerusalem.

And his mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.

20:32 And he walked in the way of Asa his father, and departed not
from it, doing that which was right in the sight of the LORD.

20:33 Howbeit the high places were not taken away: for as yet the
people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their fathers.

20:34 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold,
they are written in the book of Jehu the son of Hanani, who is
mentioned in the book of the kings of Israel.

20:35 And after this did Jehoshaphat king of Judah join himself with
Ahaziah king of Israel, who did very wickedly: 20:36 And he joined
himself with him to make ships to go to Tarshish: and they made the
ships in Eziongaber.

20:37 Then Eliezer the son of Dodavah of Mareshah prophesied against
Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou hast joined thyself with Ahaziah,
the LORD hath broken thy works. And the ships were broken, that they
were not able to go to Tarshish.

21:1 Now Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his
fathers in the city of David. And Jehoram his son reigned in his
stead.

21:2 And he had brethren the sons of Jehoshaphat, Azariah, and Jehiel,
and Zechariah, and Azariah, and Michael, and Shephatiah: all these
were the sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel.

21:3 And their father gave them great gifts of silver, and of gold,
and of precious things, with fenced cities in Judah: but the kingdom
gave he to Jehoram; because he was the firstborn.

21:4 Now when Jehoram was risen up to the kingdom of his father, he
strengthened himself, and slew all his brethren with the sword, and
divers also of the princes of Israel.

21:5 Jehoram was thirty and two years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.

21:6 And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, like as did the
house of Ahab: for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife: and he wrought
that which was evil in the eyes of the LORD.

21:7 Howbeit the LORD would not destroy the house of David, because of
the covenant that he had made with David, and as he promised to give a
light to him and to his sons for ever.

21:8 In his days the Edomites revolted from under the dominion of
Judah, and made themselves a king.

21:9 Then Jehoram went forth with his princes, and all his chariots
with him: and he rose up by night, and smote the Edomites which
compassed him in, and the captains of the chariots.

21:10 So the Edomites revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this
day.

The same time also did Libnah revolt from under his hand; because he
had forsaken the LORD God of his fathers.

21:11 Moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah and
caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication, and
compelled Judah thereto.

21:12 And there came a writing to him from Elijah the prophet, saying,
Thus saith the LORD God of David thy father, Because thou hast not
walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of Asa
king of Judah, 21:13 But hast walked in the way of the kings of
Israel, and hast made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a
whoring, like to the whoredoms of the house of Ahab, and also hast
slain thy brethren of thy father's house, which were better than
thyself: 21:14 Behold, with a great plague will the LORD smite thy
people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy goods: 21:15 And
thou shalt have great sickness by disease of thy bowels, until thy
bowels fall out by reason of the sickness day by day.

21:16 Moreover the LORD stirred up against Jehoram the spirit of the
Philistines, and of the Arabians, that were near the Ethiopians: 21:17
And they came up into Judah, and brake into it, and carried away all
the substance that was found in the king's house, and his sons also,
and his wives; so that there was never a son left him, save Jehoahaz,
the youngest of his sons.

21:18 And after all this the LORD smote him in his bowels with an
incurable disease.

21:19 And it came to pass, that in process of time, after the end of
two years, his bowels fell out by reason of his sickness: so he died
of sore diseases. And his people made no burning for him, like the
burning of his fathers.

21:20 Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign, and he
reigned in Jerusalem eight years, and departed without being desired.
Howbeit they buried him in the city of David, but not in the
sepulchres of the kings.

22:1 And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son
king in his stead: for the band of men that came with the Arabians to
the camp had slain all the eldest. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king
of Judah reigned.

22:2 Forty and two years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign, and
he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Athaliah
the daughter of Omri.

22:3 He also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab: for his mother
was his counsellor to do wickedly.

22:4 Wherefore he did evil in the sight of the LORD like the house of
Ahab: for they were his counsellors after the death of his father to
his destruction.

22:5 He walked also after their counsel, and went with Jehoram the son
of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael king of Syria at
Ramothgilead: and the Syrians smote Joram.

22:6 And he returned to be healed in Jezreel because of the wounds
which were given him at Ramah, when he fought with Hazael king of
