7:14 Forasmuch as thou art sent of the king, and of his seven
counsellors, to enquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to
the law of thy God which is in thine hand; 7:15 And to carry the
silver and gold, which the king and his counsellors have freely
offered unto the God of Israel, whose habitation is in Jerusalem, 7:16
And all the silver and gold that thou canst find in all the province
of Babylon, with the freewill offering of the people, and of the
priests, offering willingly for the house of their God which is in
Jerusalem: 7:17 That thou mayest buy speedily with this money
bullocks, rams, lambs, with their meat offerings and their drink
offerings, and offer them upon the altar of the house of your God
which is in Jerusalem.

7:18 And whatsoever shall seem good to thee, and to thy brethren, to
do with the rest of the silver and the gold, that do after the will of
your God.

7:19 The vessels also that are given thee for the service of the house
of thy God, those deliver thou before the God of Jerusalem.

7:20 And whatsoever more shall be needful for the house of thy God,
which thou shalt have occasion to bestow, bestow it out of the king's
treasure house.

7:21 And I, even I Artaxerxes the king, do make a decree to all the
treasurers which are beyond the river, that whatsoever Ezra the
priest, the scribe of the law of the God of heaven, shall require of
you, it be done speedily, 7:22 Unto an hundred talents of silver, and
to an hundred measures of wheat, and to an hundred baths of wine, and
to an hundred baths of oil, and salt without prescribing how much.

7:23 Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be
diligently done for the house of the God of heaven: for why should
there be wrath against the realm of the king and his sons?  7:24 Also
we certify you, that touching any of the priests and Levites, singers,
porters, Nethinims, or ministers of this house of God, it shall not be
lawful to impose toll, tribute, or custom, upon them.

7:25 And thou, Ezra, after the wisdom of thy God, that is in thine
hand, set magistrates and judges, which may judge all the people that
are beyond the river, all such as know the laws of thy God; and teach
ye them that know them not.

7:26 And whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the
king, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto
death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to
imprisonment.

7:27 Blessed be the LORD God of our fathers, which hath put such a
thing as this in the king's heart, to beautify the house of the LORD
which is in Jerusalem: 7:28 And hath extended mercy unto me before the
king, and his counsellors, and before all the king's mighty princes.
And I was strengthened as the hand of the LORD my God was upon me, and
I gathered together out of Israel chief men to go up with me.

8:1 These are now the chief of their fathers, and this is the
genealogy of them that went up with me from Babylon, in the reign of
Artaxerxes the king.

8:2 Of the sons of Phinehas; Gershom: of the sons of Ithamar; Daniel:
of the sons of David; Hattush.

8:3 Of the sons of Shechaniah, of the sons of Pharosh; Zechariah: and
with him were reckoned by genealogy of the males an hundred and fifty.

8:4 Of the sons of Pahathmoab; Elihoenai the son of Zerahiah, and with
him two hundred males.

8:5 Of the sons of Shechaniah; the son of Jahaziel, and with him three
hundred males.

8:6 Of the sons also of Adin; Ebed the son of Jonathan, and with him
fifty males.

8:7 And of the sons of Elam; Jeshaiah the son of Athaliah, and with
him seventy males.

8:8 And of the sons of Shephatiah; Zebadiah the son of Michael, and
with him fourscore males.

8:9 Of the sons of Joab; Obadiah the son of Jehiel, and with him two
hundred and eighteen males.

8:10 And of the sons of Shelomith; the son of Josiphiah, and with him
an hundred and threescore males.

8:11 And of the sons of Bebai; Zechariah the son of Bebai, and with
him twenty and eight males.

8:12 And of the sons of Azgad; Johanan the son of Hakkatan, and with
him an hundred and ten males.

8:13 And of the last sons of Adonikam, whose names are these,
Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemaiah, and with them threescore males.

8:14 Of the sons also of Bigvai; Uthai, and Zabbud, and with them
seventy males.

8:15 And I gathered them together to the river that runneth to Ahava;
and there abode we in tents three days: and I viewed the people, and
the priests, and found there none of the sons of Levi.

8:16 Then sent I for Eliezer, for Ariel, for Shemaiah, and for
Elnathan, and for Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for Nathan, and for
Zechariah, and for Meshullam, chief men; also for Joiarib, and for
Elnathan, men of understanding.

8:17 And I sent them with commandment unto Iddo the chief at the place
Casiphia, and I told them what they should say unto Iddo, and to his
brethren the Nethinims, at the place Casiphia, that they should bring
unto us ministers for the house of our God.

8:18 And by the good hand of our God upon us they brought us a man of
understanding, of the sons of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son of
Israel; and Sherebiah, with his sons and his brethren, eighteen; 8:19
And Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari, his
brethren and their sons, twenty; 8:20 Also of the Nethinims, whom
David and the princes had appointed for the service of the Levites,
two hundred and twenty Nethinims: all of them were expressed by name.

8:21 Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the river of Ahava, that we
might afflict ourselves before our God, to seek of him a right way for
us, and for our little ones, and for all our substance.

8:22 For I was ashamed to require of the king a band of soldiers and
horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way: because we had
spoken unto the king, saying, The hand of our God is upon all them for
good that seek him; but his power and his wrath is against all them
that forsake him.

8:23 So we fasted and besought our God for this: and he was intreated
of us.

8:24 Then I separated twelve of the chief of the priests, Sherebiah,
Hashabiah, and ten of their brethren with them, 8:25 And weighed unto
them the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, even the offering of
the house of our God, which the king, and his counsellors, and his
lords, and all Israel there present, had offered: 8:26 I even weighed
unto their hand six hundred and fifty talents of silver, and silver
vessels an hundred talents, and of gold an hundred talents; 8:27 Also
twenty basons of gold, of a thousand drams; and two vessels of fine
copper, precious as gold.

8:28 And I said unto them, Ye are holy unto the LORD; the vessels are
holy also; and the silver and the gold are a freewill offering unto
the LORD God of your fathers.

8:29 Watch ye, and keep them, until ye weigh them before the chief of
the priests and the Levites, and chief of the fathers of Israel, at
Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of the LORD.

8:30 So took the priests and the Levites the weight of the silver, and
the gold, and the vessels, to bring them to Jerusalem unto the house
of our God.

8:31 Then we departed from the river of Ahava on the twelfth day of
the first month, to go unto Jerusalem: and the hand of our God was
upon us, and he delivered us from the hand of the enemy, and of such
as lay in wait by the way.

8:32 And we came to Jerusalem, and abode there three days.

8:33 Now on the fourth day was the silver and the gold and the vessels
weighed in the house of our God by the hand of Meremoth the son of
Uriah the priest; and with him was Eleazar the son of Phinehas; and
with them was Jozabad the son of Jeshua, and Noadiah the son of
Binnui, Levites; 8:34 By number and by weight of every one: and all
the weight was written at that time.

8:35 Also the children of those that had been carried away, which were
come out of the captivity, offered burnt offerings unto the God of
Israel, twelve bullocks for all Israel, ninety and six rams, seventy
and seven lambs, twelve he goats for a sin offering: all this was a
burnt offering unto the LORD.

8:36 And they delivered the king's commissions unto the king's
lieutenants, and to the governors on this side the river: and they
furthered the people, and the house of God.

9:1 Now when these things were done, the princes came to me, saying,
The people of Israel, and the priests, and the Levites, have not
separated themselves from the people of the lands, doing according to
their abominations, even of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the
Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians,
and the Amorites.

9:2 For they have taken of their daughters for themselves, and for
their sons: so that the holy seed have mingled themselves with the
people of those lands: yea, the hand of the princes and rulers hath
been chief in this trespass.

9:3 And when I heard this thing, I rent my garment and my mantle, and
plucked off the hair of my head and of my beard, and sat down
astonied.

9:4 Then were assembled unto me every one that trembled at the words
of the God of Israel, because of the transgression of those that had
been carried away; and I sat astonied until the evening sacrifice.

9:5 And at the evening sacrifice I arose up from my heaviness; and
having rent my garment and my mantle, I fell upon my knees, and spread
out my hands unto the LORD my God, 9:6 And said, O my God, I am
ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God: for our
iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up
unto the heavens.

9:7 Since the days of our fathers have we been in a great trespass
unto this day; and for our iniquities have we, our kings, and our
priests, been delivered into the hand of the kings of the lands, to
the sword, to captivity, and to a spoil, and to confusion of face, as
it is this day.

9:8 And now for a little space grace hath been shewed from the LORD
our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his
holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little
reviving in our bondage.

9:9 For we were bondmen; yet our God hath not forsaken us in our
bondage, but hath extended mercy unto us in the sight of the kings of
Persia, to give us a reviving, to set up the house of our God, and to
repair the desolations thereof, and to give us a wall in Judah and in
Jerusalem.

9:10 And now, O our God, what shall we say after this? for we have
forsaken thy commandments, 9:11 Which thou hast commanded by thy
servants the prophets, saying, The land, unto which ye go to possess
it, is an unclean land with the filthiness of the people of the lands,
with their abominations, which have filled it from one end to another
with their uncleanness.

9:12 Now therefore give not your daughters unto their sons, neither
take their daughters unto your sons, nor seek their peace or their
wealth for ever: that ye may be strong, and eat the good of the land,
and leave it for an inheritance to your children for ever.

9:13 And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for
our great trespass, seeing that thou our God hast punished us less
than our iniquities deserve, and hast given us such deliverance as
this; 9:14 Should we again break thy commandments, and join in
affinity with the people of these abominations? wouldest not thou be
angry with us till thou hadst consumed us, so that there should be no
remnant nor escaping?  9:15 O LORD God of Israel, thou art righteous:
for we remain yet escaped, as it is this day: behold, we are before
thee in our trespasses: for we cannot stand before thee because of
this.

10:1 Now when Ezra had prayed, and when he had confessed, weeping and
casting himself down before the house of God, there assembled unto him
out of Israel a very great congregation of men and women and children:
for the people wept very sore.

10:2 And Shechaniah the son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Elam,
answered and said unto Ezra, We have trespassed against our God, and
have taken strange wives of the people of the land: yet now there is
hope in Israel concerning this thing.

10:3 Now therefore let us make a covenant with our God to put away all
the wives, and such as are born of them, according to the counsel of
my lord, and of those that tremble at the commandment of our God; and
let it be done according to the law.

10:4 Arise; for this matter belongeth unto thee: we also will be with
thee: be of good courage, and do it.

10:5 Then arose Ezra, and made the chief priests, the Levites, and all
Israel, to swear that they should do according to this word. And they
sware.

10:6 Then Ezra rose up from before the house of God, and went into the
chamber of Johanan the son of Eliashib: and when he came thither, he
did eat no bread, nor drink water: for he mourned because of the
transgression of them that had been carried away.

10:7 And they made proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem unto
all the children of the captivity, that they should gather themselves
together unto Jerusalem; 10:8 And that whosoever would not come within
three days, according to the counsel of the princes and the elders,
all his substance should be forfeited, and himself separated from the
congregation of those that had been carried away.

10:9 Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered themselves
together unto Jerusalem within three days. It was the ninth month, on
the twentieth day of the month; and all the people sat in the street
of the house of God, trembling because of this matter, and for the
great rain.

10:10 And Ezra the priest stood up, and said unto them, Ye have
transgressed, and have taken strange wives, to increase the trespass
of Israel.

10:11 Now therefore make confession unto the LORD God of your fathers,
and do his pleasure: and separate yourselves from the people of the
land, and from the strange wives.

10:12 Then all the congregation answered and said with a loud voice,
As thou hast said, so must we do.

10:13 But the people are many, and it is a time of much rain, and we
are not able to stand without, neither is this a work of one day or
two: for we are many that have transgressed in this thing.

10:14 Let now our rulers of all the congregation stand, and let all
them which have taken strange wives in our cities come at appointed
times, and with them the elders of every city, and the judges thereof,
until the fierce wrath of our God for this matter be turned from us.

10:15 Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and Jahaziah the son of Tikvah
were employed about this matter: and Meshullam and Shabbethai the
Levite helped them.

10:16 And the children of the captivity did so. And Ezra the priest,
with certain chief of the fathers, after the house of their fathers,
and all of them by their names, were separated, and sat down in the
first day of the tenth month to examine the matter.

10:17 And they made an end with all the men that had taken strange
wives by the first day of the first month.

10:18 And among the sons of the priests there were found that had
taken strange wives: namely, of the sons of Jeshua the son of Jozadak,
and his brethren; Maaseiah, and Eliezer, and Jarib, and Gedaliah.

10:19 And they gave their hands that they would put away their wives;
and being guilty, they offered a ram of the flock for their trespass.

10:20 And of the sons of Immer; Hanani, and Zebadiah.

10:21 And of the sons of Harim; Maaseiah, and Elijah, and Shemaiah,
and Jehiel, and Uzziah.

10:22 And of the sons of Pashur; Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael,
Nethaneel, Jozabad, and Elasah.

10:23 Also of the Levites; Jozabad, and Shimei, and Kelaiah, (the same
is Kelita,) Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer.

10:24 Of the singers also; Eliashib: and of the porters; Shallum, and
Telem, and Uri.

10:25 Moreover of Israel: of the sons of Parosh; Ramiah, and Jeziah,
and Malchiah, and Miamin, and Eleazar, and Malchijah, and Benaiah.

10:26 And of the sons of Elam; Mattaniah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, and
Abdi, and Jeremoth, and Eliah.

10:27 And of the sons of Zattu; Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, and
Jeremoth, and Zabad, and Aziza.

10:28 Of the sons also of Bebai; Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, and
Athlai.

10:29 And of the sons of Bani; Meshullam, Malluch, and Adaiah, Jashub,
and Sheal, and Ramoth.

10:30 And of the sons of Pahathmoab; Adna, and Chelal, Benaiah,
Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezaleel, and Binnui, and Manasseh.

10:31 And of the sons of Harim; Eliezer, Ishijah, Malchiah, Shemaiah,
Shimeon, 10:32 Benjamin, Malluch, and Shemariah.

10:33 Of the sons of Hashum; Mattenai, Mattathah, Zabad, Eliphelet,
Jeremai, Manasseh, and Shimei.

10:34 Of the sons of Bani; Maadai, Amram, and Uel, 10:35 Benaiah,
Bedeiah, Chelluh, 10:36 Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib, 10:37 Mattaniah,
Mattenai, and Jaasau, 10:38 And Bani, and Binnui, Shimei, 10:39 And
Shelemiah, and Nathan, and Adaiah, 10:40 Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai,
10:41 Azareel, and Shelemiah, Shemariah, 10:42 Shallum, Amariah, and
Joseph.

10:43 Of the sons of Nebo; Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jadau,
and Joel, Benaiah.

10:44 All these had taken strange wives: and some of them had wives by
whom they had children.



The Book of Nehemiah


1:1 The words of Nehemiah the son of Hachaliah. And it came to pass
in the month Chisleu, in the twentieth year, as I was in Shushan the
palace, 1:2 That Hanani, one of my brethren, came, he and certain men
of Judah; and I asked them concerning the Jews that had escaped, which
were left of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem.

1:3 And they said unto me, The remnant that are left of the captivity
there in the province are in great affliction and reproach: the wall
of Jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates thereof are burned
with fire.

1:4 And it came to pass, when I heard these words, that I sat down and
wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted, and prayed before the God
of heaven, 1:5 And said, I beseech thee, O LORD God of heaven, the
great and terrible God, that keepeth covenant and mercy for them that
love him and observe his commandments: 1:6 Let thine ear now be
attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou mayest hear the prayer of
thy servant, which I pray before thee now, day and night, for the
children of Israel thy servants, and confess the sins of the children
of Israel, which we have sinned against thee: both I and my father's
house have sinned.

1:7 We have dealt very corruptly against thee, and have not kept the
commandments, nor the statutes, nor the judgments, which thou
commandedst thy servant Moses.

1:8 Remember, I beseech thee, the word that thou commandedst thy
servant Moses, saying, If ye transgress, I will scatter you abroad
among the nations: 1:9 But if ye turn unto me, and keep my
commandments, and do them; though there were of you cast out unto the
uttermost part of the heaven, yet will I gather them from thence, and
will bring them unto the place that I have chosen to set my name
there.

1:10 Now these are thy servants and thy people, whom thou hast
redeemed by thy great power, and by thy strong hand.

1:11 O LORD, I beseech thee, let now thine ear be attentive to the
prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants, who desire
to fear thy name: and prosper, I pray thee, thy servant this day, and
grant him mercy in the sight of this man. For I was the king's
cupbearer.

2:1 And it came to pass in the month Nisan, in the twentieth year of
Artaxerxes the king, that wine was before him: and I took up the wine,
and gave it unto the king. Now I had not been beforetime sad in his
presence.

2:2 Wherefore the king said unto me, Why is thy countenance sad,
seeing thou art not sick? this is nothing else but sorrow of heart.
Then I was very sore afraid, 2:3 And said unto the king, Let the king
live for ever: why should not my countenance be sad, when the city,
the place of my fathers' sepulchres, lieth waste, and the gates
thereof are consumed with fire?  2:4 Then the king said unto me, For
what dost thou make request? So I prayed to the God of heaven.

2:5 And I said unto the king, If it please the king, and if thy
servant have found favour in thy sight, that thou wouldest send me
unto Judah, unto the city of my fathers' sepulchres, that I may build
it.

2:6 And the king said unto me, (the queen also sitting by him,) For
how long shall thy journey be? and when wilt thou return? So it
pleased the king to send me; and I set him a time.

2:7 Moreover I said unto the king, If it please the king, let letters
be given me to the governors beyond the river, that they may convey me
over till I come into Judah; 2:8 And a letter unto Asaph the keeper of
the king's forest, that he may give me timber to make beams for the
gates of the palace which appertained to the house, and for the wall
of the city, and for the house that I shall enter into. And the king
granted me, according to the good hand of my God upon me.

2:9 Then I came to the governors beyond the river, and gave them the
king's letters. Now the king had sent captains of the army and
horsemen with me.

2:10 When Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the
Ammonite, heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly that there was come
a man to seek the welfare of the children of Israel.

2:11 So I came to Jerusalem, and was there three days.

2:12 And I arose in the night, I and some few men with me; neither
told I any man what my God had put in my heart to do at Jerusalem:
neither was there any beast with me, save the beast that I rode upon.

2:13 And I went out by night by the gate of the valley, even before
the dragon well, and to the dung port, and viewed the walls of
Jerusalem, which were broken down, and the gates thereof were consumed
with fire.

2:14 Then I went on to the gate of the fountain, and to the king's
pool: but there was no place for the beast that was under me to pass.

2:15 Then went I up in the night by the brook, and viewed the wall,
and turned back, and entered by the gate of the valley, and so
returned.

2:16 And the rulers knew not whither I went, or what I did; neither
had I as yet told it to the Jews, nor to the priests, nor to the
nobles, nor to the rulers, nor to the rest that did the work.

2:17 Then said I unto them, Ye see the distress that we are in, how
Jerusalem lieth waste, and the gates thereof are burned with fire:
come, and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that we be no more a
reproach.

2:18 Then I told them of the hand of my God which was good upon me; as
also the king's words that he had spoken unto me. And they said, Let
us rise up and build. So they strengthened their hands for this good
work.

2:19 But when Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the
Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian, heard it, they laughed us to scorn,
and despised us, and said, What is this thing that ye do? will ye
rebel against the king?  2:20 Then answered I them, and said unto
them, The God of heaven, he will prosper us; therefore we his servants
will arise and build: but ye have no portion, nor right, nor memorial,
in Jerusalem.

3:1 Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brethren the
priests, and they builded the sheep gate; they sanctified it, and set
up the doors of it; even unto the tower of Meah they sanctified it,
unto the tower of Hananeel.

3:2 And next unto him builded the men of Jericho. And next to them
builded Zaccur the son of Imri.

3:3 But the fish gate did the sons of Hassenaah build, who also laid
the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof,
and the bars thereof.

3:4 And next unto them repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah, the son of
Koz. And next unto them repaired Meshullam the son of Berechiah, the
son of Meshezabeel. And next unto them repaired Zadok the son of
Baana.

3:5 And next unto them the Tekoites repaired; but their nobles put not
their necks to the work of their LORD.

3:6 Moreover the old gate repaired Jehoiada the son of Paseah, and
Meshullam the son of Besodeiah; they laid the beams thereof, and set
up the doors thereof, and the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.

3:7 And next unto them repaired Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the
Meronothite, the men of Gibeon, and of Mizpah, unto the throne of the
governor on this side the river.

3:8 Next unto him repaired Uzziel the son of Harhaiah, of the
goldsmiths.

Next unto him also repaired Hananiah the son of one of the
apothecaries, and they fortified Jerusalem unto the broad wall.

3:9 And next unto them repaired Rephaiah the son of Hur, the ruler of
the half part of Jerusalem.

3:10 And next unto them repaired Jedaiah the son of Harumaph, even
over against his house. And next unto him repaired Hattush the son of
Hashabniah.

3:11 Malchijah the son of Harim, and Hashub the son of Pahathmoab,
repaired the other piece, and the tower of the furnaces.

3:12 And next unto him repaired Shallum the son of Halohesh, the ruler
of the half part of Jerusalem, he and his daughters.

3:13 The valley gate repaired Hanun, and the inhabitants of Zanoah;
they built it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and
the bars thereof, and a thousand cubits on the wall unto the dung
gate.

3:14 But the dung gate repaired Malchiah the son of Rechab, the ruler
of part of Bethhaccerem; he built it, and set up the doors thereof,
the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.

3:15 But the gate of the fountain repaired Shallun the son of
Colhozeh, the ruler of part of Mizpah; he built it, and covered it,
and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof,
and the wall of the pool of Siloah by the king's garden, and unto the
stairs that go down from the city of David.

3:16 After him repaired Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, the ruler of the
half part of Bethzur, unto the place over against the sepulchres of
David, and to the pool that was made, and unto the house of the
mighty.

3:17 After him repaired the Levites, Rehum the son of Bani. Next unto
him repaired Hashabiah, the ruler of the half part of Keilah, in his
part.

3:18 After him repaired their brethren, Bavai the son of Henadad, the
ruler of the half part of Keilah.

3:19 And next to him repaired Ezer the son of Jeshua, the ruler of
Mizpah, another piece over against the going up to the armoury at the
turning of the wall.

3:20 After him Baruch the son of Zabbai earnestly repaired the other
piece, from the turning of the wall unto the door of the house of
Eliashib the high priest.

3:21 After him repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah the son of Koz
another piece, from the door of the house of Eliashib even to the end
of the house of Eliashib.

3:22 And after him repaired the priests, the men of the plain.

3:23 After him repaired Benjamin and Hashub over against their house.

After him repaired Azariah the son of Maaseiah the son of Ananiah by
his house.

3:24 After him repaired Binnui the son of Henadad another piece, from
the house of Azariah unto the turning of the wall, even unto the
corner.

3:25 Palal the son of Uzai, over against the turning of the wall, and
the tower which lieth out from the king's high house, that was by the
court of the prison. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh.

3:26 Moreover the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel, unto the place over
against the water gate toward the east, and the tower that lieth out.

3:27 After them the Tekoites repaired another piece, over against the
great tower that lieth out, even unto the wall of Ophel.

3:28 From above the horse gate repaired the priests, every one over
against his house.

3:29 After them repaired Zadok the son of Immer over against his
house.

After him repaired also Shemaiah the son of Shechaniah, the keeper of
the east gate.

3:30 After him repaired Hananiah the son of Shelemiah, and Hanun the
sixth son of Zalaph, another piece. After him repaired Meshullam the
son of Berechiah over against his chamber.

3:31 After him repaired Malchiah the goldsmith's son unto the place of
the Nethinims, and of the merchants, over against the gate Miphkad,
and to the going up of the corner.

3:32 And between the going up of the corner unto the sheep gate
repaired the goldsmiths and the merchants.

4:1 But it came to pass, that when Sanballat heard that we builded the
wall, he was wroth, and took great indignation, and mocked the Jews.

4:2 And he spake before his brethren and the army of Samaria, and
said, What do these feeble Jews? will they fortify themselves? will
they sacrifice?  will they make an end in a day? will they revive the
stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which are burned?  4:3 Now
Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and he said, Even that which they
build, if a fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall.

4:4 Hear, O our God; for we are despised: and turn their reproach upon
their own head, and give them for a prey in the land of captivity: 4:5
And cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out
from before thee: for they have provoked thee to anger before the
builders.

4:6 So built we the wall; and all the wall was joined together unto
the half thereof: for the people had a mind to work.

4:7 But it came to pass, that when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the
Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, heard that the walls
of Jerusalem were made up, and that the breaches began to be stopped,
then they were very wroth, 4:8 And conspired all of them together to
come and to fight against Jerusalem, and to hinder it.

4:9 Nevertheless we made our prayer unto our God, and set a watch
against them day and night, because of them.

4:10 And Judah said, The strength of the bearers of burdens is
decayed, and there is much rubbish; so that we are not able to build
the wall.

4:11 And our adversaries said, They shall not know, neither see, till
we come in the midst among them, and slay them, and cause the work to
cease.

4:12 And it came to pass, that when the Jews which dwelt by them came,
they said unto us ten times, From all places whence ye shall return
unto us they will be upon you.

4:13 Therefore set I in the lower places behind the wall, and on the
higher places, I even set the people after their families with their
swords, their spears, and their bows.

4:14 And I looked, and rose up, and said unto the nobles, and to the
rulers, and to the rest of the people, Be not ye afraid of them:
remember the LORD, which is great and terrible, and fight for your
brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your houses.

4:15 And it came to pass, when our enemies heard that it was known
unto us, and God had brought their counsel to nought, that we returned
all of us to the wall, every one unto his work.

4:16 And it came to pass from that time forth, that the half of my
servants wrought in the work, and the other half of them held both the
spears, the shields, and the bows, and the habergeons; and the rulers
were behind all the house of Judah.

4:17 They which builded on the wall, and they that bare burdens, with
those that laded, every one with one of his hands wrought in the work,
and with the other hand held a weapon.

4:18 For the builders, every one had his sword girded by his side, and
so builded. And he that sounded the trumpet was by me.

4:19 And I said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of
the people, The work is great and large, and we are separated upon the
wall, one far from another.

4:20 In what place therefore ye hear the sound of the trumpet, resort
ye thither unto us: our God shall fight for us.

4:21 So we laboured in the work: and half of them held the spears from
the rising of the morning till the stars appeared.

4:22 Likewise at the same time said I unto the people, Let every one
with his servant lodge within Jerusalem, that in the night they may be
a guard to us, and labour on the day.

4:23 So neither I, nor my brethren, nor my servants, nor the men of
the guard which followed me, none of us put off our clothes, saving
that every one put them off for washing.

5:1 And there was a great cry of the people and of their wives against
their brethren the Jews.

5:2 For there were that said, We, our sons, and our daughters, are
many: therefore we take up corn for them, that we may eat, and live.

5:3 Some also there were that said, We have mortgaged our lands,
vineyards, and houses, that we might buy corn, because of the dearth.

5:4 There were also that said, We have borrowed money for the king's
tribute, and that upon our lands and vineyards.

5:5 Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, our children as
their children: and, lo, we bring into bondage our sons and our
daughters to be servants, and some of our daughters are brought unto
bondage already: neither is it in our power to redeem them; for other
men have our lands and vineyards.

5:6 And I was very angry when I heard their cry and these words.

5:7 Then I consulted with myself, and I rebuked the nobles, and the
rulers, and said unto them, Ye exact usury, every one of his brother.
And I set a great assembly against them.

5:8 And I said unto them, We after our ability have redeemed our
brethren the Jews, which were sold unto the heathen; and will ye even
sell your brethren? or shall they be sold unto us? Then held they
their peace, and found nothing to answer.

5:9 Also I said, It is not good that ye do: ought ye not to walk in
the fear of our God because of the reproach of the heathen our
enemies?  5:10 I likewise, and my brethren, and my servants, might
exact of them money and corn: I pray you, let us leave off this usury.

5:11 Restore, I pray you, to them, even this day, their lands, their
vineyards, their oliveyards, and their houses, also the hundredth part
of the money, and of the corn, the wine, and the oil, that ye exact of
them.

5:12 Then said they, We will restore them, and will require nothing of
them; so will we do as thou sayest. Then I called the priests, and
took an oath of them, that they should do according to this promise.

5:13 Also I shook my lap, and said, So God shake out every man from
his house, and from his labour, that performeth not this promise, even
thus be he shaken out, and emptied. And all the congregation said,
Amen, and praised the LORD. And the people did according to this
promise.

5:14 Moreover from the time that I was appointed to be their governor
in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year even unto the two and
thirtieth year of Artaxerxes the king, that is, twelve years, I and my
brethren have not eaten the bread of the governor.

5:15 But the former governors that had been before me were chargeable
unto the people, and had taken of them bread and wine, beside forty
shekels of silver; yea, even their servants bare rule over the people:
but so did not I, because of the fear of God.

5:16 Yea, also I continued in the work of this wall, neither bought we
any land: and all my servants were gathered thither unto the work.

5:17 Moreover there were at my table an hundred and fifty of the Jews
and rulers, beside those that came unto us from among the heathen that
are about us.

5:18 Now that which was prepared for me daily was one ox and six
choice sheep; also fowls were prepared for me, and once in ten days
store of all sorts of wine: yet for all this required not I the bread
of the governor, because the bondage was heavy upon this people.

5:19 Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have
done for this people.

6:1 Now it came to pass when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and Geshem the
Arabian, and the rest of our enemies, heard that I had builded the
wall, and that there was no breach left therein; (though at that time
I had not set up the doors upon the gates;) 6:2 That Sanballat and
Geshem sent unto me, saying, Come, let us meet together in some one of
the villages in the plain of Ono. But they thought to do me mischief.

6:3 And I sent messengers unto them, saying, I am doing a great work,
so that I cannot come down: why should the work cease, whilst I leave
it, and come down to you?  6:4 Yet they sent unto me four times after
this sort; and I answered them after the same manner.

6:5 Then sent Sanballat his servant unto me in like manner the fifth
time with an open letter in his hand; 6:6 Wherein was written, It is
reported among the heathen, and Gashmu saith it, that thou and the
Jews think to rebel: for which cause thou buildest the wall, that thou
mayest be their king, according to these words.

6:7 And thou hast also appointed prophets to preach of thee at
Jerusalem, saying, There is a king in Judah: and now shall it be
reported to the king according to these words. Come now therefore, and
let us take counsel together.

6:8 Then I sent unto him, saying, There are no such things done as
thou sayest, but thou feignest them out of thine own heart.

6:9 For they all made us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened
from the work, that it be not done. Now therefore, O God, strengthen
my hands.

6:10 Afterward I came unto the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah
the son of Mehetabeel, who was shut up; and he said, Let us meet
together in the house of God, within the temple, and let us shut the
doors of the temple: for they will come to slay thee; yea, in the
night will they come to slay thee.

6:11 And I said, Should such a man as I flee? and who is there, that,
being as I am, would go into the temple to save his life? I will not
go in.

6:12 And, lo, I perceived that God had not sent him; but that he
pronounced this prophecy against me: for Tobiah and Sanballat had
hired him.

6:13 Therefore was he hired, that I should be afraid, and do so, and
sin, and that they might have matter for an evil report, that they
might reproach me.

6:14 My God, think thou upon Tobiah and Sanballat according to these
their works, and on the prophetess Noadiah, and the rest of the
prophets, that would have put me in fear.

6:15 So the wall was finished in the twenty and fifth day of the month
Elul, in fifty and two days.

6:16 And it came to pass, that when all our enemies heard thereof, and
all the heathen that were about us saw these things, they were much
cast down in their own eyes: for they perceived that this work was
wrought of our God.

6:17 Moreover in those days the nobles of Judah sent many letters unto
Tobiah, and the letters of Tobiah came unto them.

6:18 For there were many in Judah sworn unto him, because he was the
son in law of Shechaniah the son of Arah; and his son Johanan had
taken the daughter of Meshullam the son of Berechiah.

6:19 Also they reported his good deeds before me, and uttered my words
to him. And Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear.

7:1 Now it came to pass, when the wall was built, and I had set up the
doors, and the porters and the singers and the Levites were appointed,
7:2 That I gave my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the ruler of the
palace, charge over Jerusalem: for he was a faithful man, and feared
God above many.

7:3 And I said unto them, Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened
until the sun be hot; and while they stand by, let them shut the
doors, and bar them: and appoint watches of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, every one in his watch, and every one to be over against
his house.

7:4 Now the city was large and great: but the people were few therein,
and the houses were not builded.

7:5 And my God put into mine heart to gather together the nobles, and
the rulers, and the people, that they might be reckoned by genealogy.
And I found a register of the genealogy of them which came up at the
first, and found written therein, 7:6 These are the children of the
province, that went up out of the captivity, of those that had been
carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried
away, and came again to Jerusalem and to Judah, every one unto his
city; 7:7 Who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah,
Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum,
Baanah. The number, I say, of the men of the people of Israel was
this; 7:8 The children of Parosh, two thousand an hundred seventy and
two.

7:9 The children of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two.

7:10 The children of Arah, six hundred fifty and two.

7:11 The children of Pahathmoab, of the children of Jeshua and Joab,
two thousand and eight hundred and eighteen.

7:12 The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.

7:13 The children of Zattu, eight hundred forty and five.

7:14 The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and threescore.

7:15 The children of Binnui, six hundred forty and eight.

7:16 The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty and eight.

7:17 The children of Azgad, two thousand three hundred twenty and two.

7:18 The children of Adonikam, six hundred threescore and seven.

7:19 The children of Bigvai, two thousand threescore and seven.

7:20 The children of Adin, six hundred fifty and five.

7:21 The children of Ater of Hezekiah, ninety and eight.

7:22 The children of Hashum, three hundred twenty and eight.

7:23 The children of Bezai, three hundred twenty and four.

7:24 The children of Hariph, an hundred and twelve.

7:25 The children of Gibeon, ninety and five.

7:26 The men of Bethlehem and Netophah, an hundred fourscore and
eight.

7:27 The men of Anathoth, an hundred twenty and eight.

7:28 The men of Bethazmaveth, forty and two.

7:29 The men of Kirjathjearim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred
forty and three.

7:30 The men of Ramah and Gaba, six hundred twenty and one.

7:31 The men of Michmas, an hundred and twenty and two.

7:32 The men of Bethel and Ai, an hundred twenty and three.

7:33 The men of the other Nebo, fifty and two.

7:34 The children of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and
four.

7:35 The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty.

7:36 The children of Jericho, three hundred forty and five.

7:37 The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty and
one.

7:38 The children of Senaah, three thousand nine hundred and thirty.

7:39 The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua,
nine hundred seventy and three.

7:40 The children of Immer, a thousand fifty and two.

7:41 The children of Pashur, a thousand two hundred forty and seven.

7:42 The children of Harim, a thousand and seventeen.

7:43 The Levites: the children of Jeshua, of Kadmiel, and of the
children of Hodevah, seventy and four.

7:44 The singers: the children of Asaph, an hundred forty and eight.

7:45 The porters: the children of Shallum, the children of Ater, the
children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the
children of Shobai, an hundred thirty and eight.

7:46 The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the children of Hashupha,
the children of Tabbaoth, 7:47 The children of Keros, the children of
Sia, the children of Padon, 7:48 The children of Lebana, the children
of Hagaba, the children of Shalmai, 7:49 The children of Hanan, the
children of Giddel, the children of Gahar, 7:50 The children of
Reaiah, the children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda, 7:51 The
children of Gazzam, the children of Uzza, the children of Phaseah,
7:52 The children of Besai, the children of Meunim, the children of
Nephishesim, 7:53 The children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the
children of Harhur, 7:54 The children of Bazlith, the children of
Mehida, the children of Harsha, 7:55 The children of Barkos, the
children of Sisera, the children of Tamah, 7:56 The children of
Neziah, the children of Hatipha.

7:57 The children of Solomon's servants: the children of Sotai, the
children of Sophereth, the children of Perida, 7:58 The children of
Jaala, the children of Darkon, the children of Giddel, 7:59 The
children of Shephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of
Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of Amon.

7:60 All the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon's servants, were
three hundred ninety and two.

7:61 And these were they which went up also from Telmelah, Telharesha,
Cherub, Addon, and Immer: but they could not shew their father's
house, nor their seed, whether they were of Israel.

7:62 The children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of
Nekoda, six hundred forty and two.

7:63 And of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the children of Koz,
the children of Barzillai, which took one of the daughters of
Barzillai the Gileadite to wife, and was called after their name.
