
3:22 But every woman shall borrow of her neighbour, and of her that
sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and
raiment: and ye shall put them upon your sons, and upon your
daughters; and ye shall spoil the Egyptians.

4:1 And Moses answered and said, But, behold, they will not believe
me, nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, The LORD hath not
appeared unto thee.

4:2 And the LORD said unto him, What is that in thine hand? And he
said, A rod.

4:3 And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground,
and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from before it.

4:4 And the LORD said unto Moses, Put forth thine hand, and take it by
the tail. And he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a
rod in his hand: 4:5 That they may believe that the LORD God of their
fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
hath appeared unto thee.

4:6 And the LORD said furthermore unto him, Put now thine hand into
thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it
out, behold, his hand was leprous as snow.

4:7 And he said, Put thine hand into thy bosom again. And he put his
hand into his bosom again; and plucked it out of his bosom, and,
behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.

4:8 And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither
hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the
voice of the latter sign.

4:9 And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two
signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the
water of the river, and pour it upon the dry land: and the water which
thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land.

4:10 And Moses said unto the LORD, O my LORD, I am not eloquent,
neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but I
am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.

4:11 And the LORD said unto him, Who hath made man's mouth? or who
maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not I the
LORD?  4:12 Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach
thee what thou shalt say.

4:13 And he said, O my LORD, send, I pray thee, by the hand of him
whom thou wilt send.

4:14 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Moses, and he said,
Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well.
And also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee: and when he seeth
thee, he will be glad in his heart.

4:15 And thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and I
will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye
shall do.

4:16 And he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall be,
even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him
instead of God.

4:17 And thou shalt take this rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt
do signs.

4:18 And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father in law, and said
unto him, Let me go, I pray thee, and return unto my brethren which
are in Egypt, and see whether they be yet alive. And Jethro said to
Moses, Go in peace.

4:19 And the LORD said unto Moses in Midian, Go, return into Egypt:
for all the men are dead which sought thy life.

4:20 And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass,
and he returned to the land of Egypt: and Moses took the rod of God in
his hand.

4:21 And the LORD said unto Moses, When thou goest to return into
Egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before Pharaoh, which I have
put in thine hand: but I will harden his heart, that he shall not let
the people go.

4:22 And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the LORD, Israel is
my son, even my firstborn: 4:23 And I say unto thee, Let my son go,
that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will
slay thy son, even thy firstborn.

4:24 And it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the LORD met him,
and sought to kill him.

4:25 Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her
son, and cast it at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband art
thou to me.

4:26 So he let him go: then she said, A bloody husband thou art,
because of the circumcision.

4:27 And the LORD said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses.
And he went, and met him in the mount of God, and kissed him.

4:28 And Moses told Aaron all the words of the LORD who had sent him,
and all the signs which he had commanded him.

4:29 And Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders of
the children of Israel: 4:30 And Aaron spake all the words which the
LORD had spoken unto Moses, and did the signs in the sight of the
people.

4:31 And the people believed: and when they heard that the LORD had
visited the children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their
affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.

5:1 And afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and told Pharaoh, Thus
saith the LORD God of Israel, Let my people go, that they may hold a
feast unto me in the wilderness.

5:2 And Pharaoh said, Who is the LORD, that I should obey his voice to
let Israel go? I know not the LORD, neither will I let Israel go.

5:3 And they said, The God of the Hebrews hath met with us: let us go,
we pray thee, three days' journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto
the LORD our God; lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the
sword.

5:4 And the king of Egypt said unto them, Wherefore do ye, Moses and
Aaron, let the people from their works? get you unto your burdens.

5:5 And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the land now are many, and
ye make them rest from their burdens.

5:6 And Pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people,
and their officers, saying, 5:7 Ye shall no more give the people straw
to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for
themselves.

5:8 And the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye
shall lay upon them; ye shall not diminish ought thereof: for they be
idle; therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice to our God.

5:9 Let there more work be laid upon the men, that they may labour
therein; and let them not regard vain words.

5:10 And the taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers,
and they spake to the people, saying, Thus saith Pharaoh, I will not
give you straw.

5:11 Go ye, get you straw where ye can find it: yet not ought of your
work shall be diminished.

5:12 So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of
Egypt to gather stubble instead of straw.

5:13 And the taskmasters hasted them, saying, Fulfil your works, your
daily tasks, as when there was straw.

5:14 And the officers of the children of Israel, which Pharaoh's
taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and demanded, Wherefore
have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick both yesterday and to
day, as heretofore?  5:15 Then the officers of the children of Israel
came and cried unto Pharaoh, saying, Wherefore dealest thou thus with
thy servants?  5:16 There is no straw given unto thy servants, and
they say to us, Make brick: and, behold, thy servants are beaten; but
the fault is in thine own people.

5:17 But he said, Ye are idle, ye are idle: therefore ye say, Let us
go and do sacrifice to the LORD.

5:18 Go therefore now, and work; for there shall no straw be given
you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks.

5:19 And the officers of the children of Israel did see that they were
in evil case, after it was said, Ye shall not minish ought from your
bricks of your daily task.

5:20 And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as they came
forth from Pharaoh: 5:21 And they said unto them, The LORD look upon
you, and judge; because ye have made our savour to be abhorred in the
eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in
their hand to slay us.

5:22 And Moses returned unto the LORD, and said, LORD, wherefore hast
thou so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou hast sent me?
5:23 For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done
evil to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all.

6:1 Then the LORD said unto Moses, Now shalt thou see what I will do
to Pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a
strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.

6:2 And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the LORD: 6:3
And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name
of God Almighty, but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them.

6:4 And I have also established my covenant with them, to give them
the land of Canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were
strangers.

6:5 And I have also heard the groaning of the children of Israel, whom
the Egyptians keep in bondage; and I have remembered my covenant.

6:6 Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the LORD, and I
will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will
rid you out of their bondage, and I will redeem you with a stretched
out arm, and with great judgments: 6:7 And I will take you to me for a
people, and I will be to you a God: and ye shall know that I am the
LORD your God, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the
Egyptians.

6:8 And I will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which I did
swear to give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give
it you for an heritage: I am the LORD.

6:9 And Moses spake so unto the children of Israel: but they hearkened
not unto Moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.

6:10 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 6:11 Go in, speak unto
Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the children of Israel go out of
his land.

6:12 And Moses spake before the LORD, saying, Behold, the children of
Israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall Pharaoh hear me, who
am of uncircumcised lips?  6:13 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto
Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of Israel, and unto
Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land
of Egypt.

6:14 These be the heads of their fathers' houses: The sons of Reuben
the firstborn of Israel; Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi: these
be the families of Reuben.

6:15 And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin,
and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman: these are the
families of Simeon.

6:16 And these are the names of the sons of Levi according to their
generations; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari: and the years of the
life of Levi were an hundred thirty and seven years.

6:17 The sons of Gershon; Libni, and Shimi, according to their
families.

6:18 And the sons of Kohath; Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel:
and the years of the life of Kohath were an hundred thirty and three
years.

6:19 And the sons of Merari; Mahali and Mushi: these are the families
of Levi according to their generations.

6:20 And Amram took him Jochebed his father's sister to wife; and she
bare him Aaron and Moses: and the years of the life of Amram were an
hundred and thirty and seven years.

6:21 And the sons of Izhar; Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri.

6:22 And the sons of Uzziel; Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Zithri.

6:23 And Aaron took him Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab, sister of
Naashon, to wife; and she bare him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and
Ithamar.

6:24 And the sons of Korah; Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these
are the families of the Korhites.

6:25 And Eleazar Aaron's son took him one of the daughters of Putiel
to wife; and she bare him Phinehas: these are the heads of the fathers
of the Levites according to their families.

6:26 These are that Aaron and Moses, to whom the LORD said, Bring out
the children of Israel from the land of Egypt according to their
armies.

6:27 These are they which spake to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out
the children of Israel from Egypt: these are that Moses and Aaron.

6:28 And it came to pass on the day when the LORD spake unto Moses in
the land of Egypt, 6:29 That the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, I am
the LORD: speak thou unto Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I say unto
thee.

6:30 And Moses said before the LORD, Behold, I am of uncircumcised
lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?  7:1 And the LORD said
unto Moses, See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh: and Aaron thy
brother shall be thy prophet.

7:2 Thou shalt speak all that I command thee: and Aaron thy brother
shall speak unto Pharaoh, that he send the children of Israel out of
his land.

7:3 And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply my signs and my
wonders in the land of Egypt.

7:4 But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand
upon Egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and my people the children of
Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great judgments.

7:5 And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I stretch
forth mine hand upon Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel from
among them.

7:6 And Moses and Aaron did as the LORD commanded them, so did they.

7:7 And Moses was fourscore years old, and Aaron fourscore and three
years old, when they spake unto Pharaoh.

7:8 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 7:9 When
Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, Shew a miracle for you: then
thou shalt say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and cast it before Pharaoh,
and it shall become a serpent.

7:10 And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and they did so as the
LORD had commanded: and Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh, and
before his servants, and it became a serpent.

7:11 Then Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the
magicians of Egypt, they also did in like manner with their
enchantments.

7:12 For they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents:
but Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.

7:13 And he hardened Pharaoh's heart, that he hearkened not unto them;
as the LORD had said.

7:14 And the LORD said unto Moses, Pharaoh's heart is hardened, he
refuseth to let the people go.

7:15 Get thee unto Pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the
water; and thou shalt stand by the river's brink against he come; and
the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take in thine hand.

7:16 And thou shalt say unto him, The LORD God of the Hebrews hath
sent me unto thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in
the wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear.

7:17 Thus saith the LORD, In this thou shalt know that I am the LORD:
behold, I will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters
which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood.

7:18 And the fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall
stink; and the Egyptians shall lothe to drink of the water of the
river.

7:19 And the LORD spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and
stretch out thine hand upon the waters of Egypt, upon their streams,
upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their pools of
water, that they may become blood; and that there may be blood
throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood, and in
vessels of stone.

7:20 And Moses and Aaron did so, as the LORD commanded; and he lifted
up the rod, and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight
of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants; and all the waters that
were in the river were turned to blood.

7:21 And the fish that was in the river died; and the river stank, and
the Egyptians could not drink of the water of the river; and there was
blood throughout all the land of Egypt.

7:22 And the magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments: and
Pharaoh's heart was hardened, neither did he hearken unto them; as the
LORD had said.

7:23 And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set
his heart to this also.

7:24 And all the Egyptians digged round about the river for water to
drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river.

7:25 And seven days were fulfilled, after that the LORD had smitten
the river.

8:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, Go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him,
Thus saith the LORD, Let my people go, that they may serve me.

8:2 And if thou refuse to let them go, behold, I will smite all thy
borders with frogs: 8:3 And the river shall bring forth frogs
abundantly, which shall go up and come into thine house, and into thy
bedchamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and
upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneadingtroughs:
8:4 And the frogs shall come up both on thee, and upon thy people, and
upon all thy servants.

8:5 And the LORD spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth thine
hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the
ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of Egypt.

8:6 And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the
frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.

8:7 And the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up
frogs upon the land of Egypt.

8:8 Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Intreat the
LORD, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people; and
I will let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the LORD.

8:9 And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me: when shall I intreat
for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to destroy the
frogs from thee and thy houses, that they may remain in the river
only?  8:10 And he said, To morrow. And he said, Be it according to
thy word: that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the LORD
our God.

8:11 And the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and
from thy servants, and from thy people; they shall remain in the river
only.

8:12 And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh: and Moses cried unto
the LORD because of the frogs which he had brought against Pharaoh.

8:13 And the LORD did according to the word of Moses; and the frogs
died out of the houses, out of the villages, and out of the fields.

8:14 And they gathered them together upon heaps: and the land stank.

8:15 But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his
heart, and hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had said.

8:16 And the LORD said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy
rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice
throughout all the land of Egypt.

8:17 And they did so; for Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod,
and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in
beast; all the dust of the land became lice throughout all the land of
Egypt.

8:18 And the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth
lice, but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast.

8:19 Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of God:
and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as
the LORD had said.

8:20 And the LORD said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and
stand before Pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto
him, Thus saith the LORD, Let my people go, that they may serve me.

8:21 Else, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, I will send
swarms of flies upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people,
and into thy houses: and the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of
swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are.

8:22 And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my
people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end thou
mayest know that I am the LORD in the midst of the earth.

8:23 And I will put a division between my people and thy people: to
morrow shall this sign be.

8:24 And the LORD did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies
into the house of Pharaoh, and into his servants' houses, and into all
the land of Egypt: the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of
flies.

8:25 And Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said, Go ye,
sacrifice to your God in the land.

8:26 And Moses said, It is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice
the abomination of the Egyptians to the LORD our God: lo, shall we
sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will
they not stone us?  8:27 We will go three days' journey into the
wilderness, and sacrifice to the LORD our God, as he shall command us.

8:28 And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to the
LORD your God in the wilderness; only ye shall not go very far away:
intreat for me.

8:29 And Moses said, Behold, I go out from thee, and I will intreat
the LORD that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his
servants, and from his people, to morrow: but let not Pharaoh deal
deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to the
LORD.

8:30 And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the LORD.

8:31 And the LORD did according to the word of Moses; and he removed
the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his
people; there remained not one.

8:32 And Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would
he let the people go.

9:1 Then the LORD said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh, and tell him,
Thus saith the LORD God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they
may serve me.

9:2 For if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them still, 9:3
Behold, the hand of the LORD is upon thy cattle which is in the field,
upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and
upon the sheep: there shall be a very grievous murrain.

9:4 And the LORD shall sever between the cattle of Israel and the
cattle of Egypt: and there shall nothing die of all that is the
children's of Israel.

9:5 And the LORD appointed a set time, saying, To morrow the LORD
shall do this thing in the land.

9:6 And the LORD did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of
Egypt died: but of the cattle of the children of Israel died not one.

9:7 And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of
the Israelites dead. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did
not let the people go.

9:8 And the LORD said unto Moses and unto Aaron, Take to you handfuls
of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven
in the sight of Pharaoh.

9:9 And it shall become small dust in all the land of Egypt, and shall
be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast,
throughout all the land of Egypt.

9:10 And they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh; and
Moses sprinkled it up toward heaven; and it became a boil breaking
forth with blains upon man, and upon beast.

9:11 And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the
boils; for the boil was upon the magicians, and upon all the
Egyptians.

9:12 And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he hearkened not
unto them; as the LORD had spoken unto Moses.

9:13 And the LORD said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and
stand before Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of the
Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.

9:14 For I will at this time send all my plagues upon thine heart, and
upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayest know that
there is none like me in all the earth.

9:15 For now I will stretch out my hand, that I may smite thee and thy
people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut off from the earth.

9:16 And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to
shew in thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all
the earth.

9:17 As yet exaltest thou thyself against my people, that thou wilt
not let them go?  9:18 Behold, to morrow about this time I will cause
it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not been in Egypt since
the foundation thereof even until now.

9:19 Send therefore now, and gather thy cattle, and all that thou hast
in the field; for upon every man and beast which shall be found in the
field, and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon
them, and they shall die.

9:20 He that feared the word of the LORD among the servants of Pharaoh
made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses: 9:21 And he
that regarded not the word of the LORD left his servants and his
cattle in the field.

9:22 And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch forth thine hand toward
heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, upon man, and
upon beast, and upon every herb of the field, throughout the land of
Egypt.

9:23 And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven: and the LORD
sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the
LORD rained hail upon the land of Egypt.

9:24 So there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous,
such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it
became a nation.

9:25 And the hail smote throughout all the land of Egypt all that was
in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the
field, and brake every tree of the field.

9:26 Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were,
was there no hail.

9:27 And Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto
them, I have sinned this time: the LORD is righteous, and I and my
people are wicked.

9:28 Intreat the LORD (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty
thunderings and hail; and I will let you go, and ye shall stay no
longer.

9:29 And Moses said unto him, As soon as I am gone out of the city, I
will spread abroad my hands unto the LORD; and the thunder shall
cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that thou mayest know how
that the earth is the LORD's.

9:30 But as for thee and thy servants, I know that ye will not yet
fear the LORD God.

9:31 And the flax and the barley was smitten: for the barley was in
the ear, and the flax was bolled.

9:32 But the wheat and the rie were not smitten: for they were not
grown up.

9:33 And Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and spread abroad
his hands unto the LORD: and the thunders and hail ceased, and the
rain was not poured upon the earth.

9:34 And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders
were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his
servants.

9:35 And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, neither would he let the
children of Israel go; as the LORD had spoken by Moses.

10:1 And the LORD said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh: for I have
hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants, that I might shew
these my signs before him: 10:2 And that thou mayest tell in the ears
of thy son, and of thy son's son, what things I have wrought in Egypt,
and my signs which I have done among them; that ye may know how that I
am the LORD.

10:3 And Moses and Aaron came in unto Pharaoh, and said unto him, Thus
saith the LORD God of the Hebrews, How long wilt thou refuse to humble
thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me.

10:4 Else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to morrow will
I bring the locusts into thy coast: 10:5 And they shall cover the face
of the earth, that one cannot be able to see the earth: and they shall
eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you
from the hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of
the field: 10:6 And they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of all
thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians; which neither thy
fathers, nor thy fathers' fathers have seen, since the day that they
were upon the earth unto this day. And he turned himself, and went out
from Pharaoh.

10:7 And Pharaoh's servants said unto him, How long shall this man be
a snare unto us? let the men go, that they may serve the LORD their
God: knowest thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed?  10:8 And Moses and
Aaron were brought again unto Pharaoh: and he said unto them, Go,
serve the LORD your God: but who are they that shall go?  10:9 And
Moses said, We will go with our young and with our old, with our sons
and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we go;
for we must hold a feast unto the LORD.

10:10 And he said unto them, Let the LORD be so with you, as I will
let you go, and your little ones: look to it; for evil is before you.

10:11 Not so: go now ye that are men, and serve the LORD; for that ye
did desire. And they were driven out from Pharaoh's presence.

10:12 And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the
land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come up upon the land of
Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that the hail hath
left.

10:13 And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and
the LORD brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all that
night; and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts.

10:14 And the locust went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in
all the coasts of Egypt: very grievous were they; before them there
were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.

10:15 For they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land
was darkened; and they did eat every herb of the land, and all the
fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there remained not any
green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all
the land of Egypt.

10:16 Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste; and he said, I
have sinned against the LORD your God, and against you.

10:17 Now therefore forgive, I pray thee, my sin only this once, and
intreat the LORD your God, that he may take away from me this death
only.

10:18 And he went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the LORD.

10:19 And the LORD turned a mighty strong west wind, which took away
the locusts, and cast them into the Red sea; there remained not one
locust in all the coasts of Egypt.

10:20 But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let
the children of Israel go.

10:21 And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand toward
heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even
darkness which may be felt.

10:22 And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was
a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days: 10:23 They saw
not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days: but
all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings.

10:24 And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said, Go ye, serve the LORD;
only let your flocks and your herds be stayed: let your little ones
also go with you.

10:25 And Moses said, Thou must give us also sacrifices and burnt
offerings, that we may sacrifice unto the LORD our God.

10:26 Our cattle also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof be
left behind; for thereof must we take to serve the LORD our God; and
we know not with what we must serve the LORD, until we come thither.

10:27 But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he would not let them
go.

10:28 And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee from me, take heed to
thyself, see my face no more; for in that day thou seest my face thou
shalt die.

10:29 And Moses said, Thou hast spoken well, I will see thy face again
no more.

11:1 And the LORD said unto Moses, Yet will I bring one plague more
upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence:
when he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out hence
altogether.

11:2 Speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man borrow of
his neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour, jewels of silver and
jewels of gold.

11:3 And the LORD gave the people favour in the sight of the
Egyptians.

Moreover the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the
sight of Pharaoh's servants, and in the sight of the people.

11:4 And Moses said, Thus saith the LORD, About midnight will I go out
into the midst of Egypt: 11:5 And all the firstborn in the land of
Egypt shall die, from the first born of Pharaoh that sitteth upon his
throne, even unto the firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the
mill; and all the firstborn of beasts.

11:6 And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt,
such as there was none like it, nor shall be like it any more.

11:7 But against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move
his tongue, against man or beast: that ye may know how that the LORD
doth put a difference between the Egyptians and Israel.

11:8 And all these thy servants shall come down unto me, and bow down
themselves unto me, saying, Get thee out, and all the people that
follow thee: and after that I will go out. And he went out from
Pharaoh in a great anger.

11:9 And the LORD said unto Moses, Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you;
that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.

11:10 And Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh: and
the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the
children of Israel go out of his land.

12:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt
saying, 12:2 This month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it
shall be the first month of the year to you.

12:3 Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the
tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb,
according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for an house: 12:4 And
if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbour
next unto his house take it according to the number of the souls;
every man according to his eating shall make your count for the lamb.

12:5 Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year: ye
shall take it out from the sheep, or from the goats: 12:6 And ye shall
keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole
assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening.

12:7 And they shall take of the blood, and strike it on the two side
posts and on the upper door post of the houses, wherein they shall eat
it.

12:8 And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and
unleavened bread; and with bitter herbs they shall eat it.

12:9 Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with
fire; his head with his legs, and with the purtenance thereof.

12:10 And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning; and
that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire.

12:11 And thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on
your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste:
it is the LORD's passover.

12:12 For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will
smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and
against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I am the LORD.

12:13 And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where
ye are: and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague
shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt.

12:14 And this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep
it a feast to the LORD throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a
feast by an ordinance for ever.

12:15 Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; even the first day ye
shall put away leaven out of your houses: for whosoever eateth
leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul
shall be cut off from Israel.

12:16 And in the first day there shall be an holy convocation, and in
the seventh day there shall be an holy convocation to you; no manner
of work shall be done in them, save that which every man must eat,
that only may be done of you.

12:17 And ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread; for in this
selfsame day have I brought your armies out of the land of Egypt:
therefore shall ye observe this day in your generations by an
ordinance for ever.

12:18 In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at even,
ye shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentieth day of the
month at even.

12:19 Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses: for
whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut
off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a stranger, or born
in the land.

12:20 Ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall ye
eat unleavened bread.

12:21 Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel, and said unto
them, Draw out and take you a lamb according to your families, and
kill the passover.

12:22 And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood
that is in the bason, and strike the lintel and the two side posts
with the blood that is in the bason; and none of you shall go out at
the door of his house until the morning.

12:23 For the LORD will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and when
he seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side posts, the
LORD will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to
come in unto your houses to smite you.

12:24 And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to
thy sons for ever.

12:25 And it shall come to pass, when ye be come to the land which the
LORD will give you, according as he hath promised, that ye shall keep
this service.

12:26 And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto
you, What mean ye by this service?  12:27 That ye shall say, It is the
sacrifice of the LORD's passover, who passed over the houses of the
children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and
delivered our houses. And the people bowed the head and worshipped.

12:28 And the children of Israel went away, and did as the LORD had
commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.

12:29 And it came to pass, that at midnight the LORD smote all the
firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat
on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the
dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.

12:30 And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and
all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in Egypt; for there was
not a house where there was not one dead.

12:31 And he called for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, Rise up,
and get you forth from among my people, both ye and the children of
Israel; and go, serve the LORD, as ye have said.

12:32 Also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be
gone; and bless me also.

12:33 And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, that they might
send them out of the land in haste; for they said, We be all dead men.

12:34 And the people took their dough before it was leavened, their
kneadingtroughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders.

12:35 And the children of Israel did according to the word of Moses;
and they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of
gold, and raiment: 12:36 And the LORD gave the people favour in the
sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent unto them such things as
they required. And they spoiled the Egyptians.

12:37 And the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth,
about six hundred thousand on foot that were men, beside children.

12:38 And a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and
herds, even very much cattle.

12:39 And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought
forth out of Egypt, for it was not leavened; because they were thrust
out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they prepared for
themselves any victual.

12:40 Now the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in
Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years.

12:41 And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty
years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the hosts of
the LORD went out from the land of Egypt.

12:42 It is a night to be much observed unto the LORD for bringing
them out from the land of Egypt: this is that night of the LORD to be
observed of all the children of Israel in their generations.

12:43 And the LORD said unto Moses and Aaron, This is the ordinance of
the passover: There shall no stranger eat thereof: 12:44 But every
man's servant that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised
him, then shall he eat thereof.

12:45 A foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.

12:46 In one house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth ought
of the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shall ye break a bone
thereof.

12:47 All the congregation of Israel shall keep it.

12:48 And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the
passover to the LORD, let all his males be circumcised, and then let
him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the
land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.

12:49 One law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger
that sojourneth among you.

12:50 Thus did all the children of Israel; as the LORD commanded Moses
and Aaron, so did they.

12:51 And it came to pass the selfsame day, that the LORD did bring
the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their armies.

13:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 13:2 Sanctify unto me all
the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of
Israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine.

13:3 And Moses said unto the people, Remember this day, in which ye
came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by strength of
hand the LORD brought you out from this place: there shall no leavened
bread be eaten.

13:4 This day came ye out in the month Abib.

13:5 And it shall be when the LORD shall bring thee into the land of
the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Hivites,
and the Jebusites, which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee, a
land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this service in
this month.

13:6 Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh
day shall be a feast to the LORD.

13:7 Unleavened bread shall be eaten seven days; and there shall no
leavened bread be seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen
with thee in all thy quarters.

13:8 And thou shalt shew thy son in that day, saying, This is done
because of that which the LORD did unto me when I came forth out of
Egypt.

13:9 And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a
memorial between thine eyes, that the LORD's law may be in thy mouth:
for with a strong hand hath the LORD brought thee out of Egypt.

13:10 Thou shalt therefore keep this ordinance in his season from year
to year.

13:11 And it shall be when the LORD shall bring thee into the land of
the Canaanites, as he sware unto thee and to thy fathers, and shall
give it thee, 13:12 That thou shalt set apart unto the LORD all that
openeth the matrix, and every firstling that cometh of a beast which
thou hast; the males shall be the LORD's.

13:13 And every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb; and
if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break his neck: and all
the firstborn of man among thy children shalt thou redeem.

13:14 And it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come,
saying, What is this? that thou shalt say unto him, By strength of
hand the LORD brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage:
13:15 And it came to pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that
the LORD slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the
firstborn of man, and the firstborn of beast: therefore I sacrifice to
the LORD all that openeth the matrix, being males; but all the
firstborn of my children I redeem.

13:16 And it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets
between thine eyes: for by strength of hand the LORD brought us forth
out of Egypt.

13:17 And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had let the people go, that
God led them not through the way of the land of the Philistines,
although that was near; for God said, Lest peradventure the people
repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt: 13:18 But God led
the people about, through the way of the wilderness of the Red sea:
and the children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land of Egypt.

13:19 And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him: for he had straitly
sworn the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you; and
ye shall carry up my bones away hence with you.

