silver, and the ornament of thy molten images of gold: thou shalt cast
them away as a menstruous cloth; thou shalt say unto it, Get thee
hence.

30:23 Then shall he give the rain of thy seed, that thou shalt sow the
ground withal; and bread of the increase of the earth, and it shall be
fat and plenteous: in that day shall thy cattle feed in large
pastures.

30:24 The oxen likewise and the young asses that ear the ground shall
eat clean provender, which hath been winnowed with the shovel and with
the fan.

30:25 And there shall be upon every high mountain, and upon every high
hill, rivers and streams of waters in the day of the great slaughter,
when the towers fall.

30:26 Moreover the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun,
and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven
days, in the day that the LORD bindeth up the breach of his people,
and healeth the stroke of their wound.

30:27 Behold, the name of the LORD cometh from far, burning with his
anger, and the burden thereof is heavy: his lips are full of
indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire: 30:28 And his breath,
as an overflowing stream, shall reach to the midst of the neck, to
sift the nations with the sieve of vanity: and there shall be a bridle
in the jaws of the people, causing them to err.

30:29 Ye shall have a song, as in the night when a holy solemnity is
kept; and gladness of heart, as when one goeth with a pipe to come
into the mountain of the LORD, to the mighty One of Israel.

30:30 And the LORD shall cause his glorious voice to be heard, and
shall shew the lighting down of his arm, with the indignation of his
anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire, with scattering, and
tempest, and hailstones.

30:31 For through the voice of the LORD shall the Assyrian be beaten
down, which smote with a rod.

30:32 And in every place where the grounded staff shall pass, which
the LORD shall lay upon him, it shall be with tabrets and harps: and
in battles of shaking will he fight with it.

30:33 For Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for the king it is prepared;
he hath made it deep and large: the pile thereof is fire and much
wood; the breath of the LORD, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle
it.

31:1 Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help; and stay on horses,
and trust in chariots, because they are many; and in horsemen, because
they are very strong; but they look not unto the Holy One of Israel,
neither seek the LORD!  31:2 Yet he also is wise, and will bring evil,
and will not call back his words: but will arise against the house of
the evildoers, and against the help of them that work iniquity.

31:3 Now the Egyptians are men, and not God; and their horses flesh,
and not spirit. When the LORD shall stretch out his hand, both he that
helpeth shall fall, and he that is holpen shall fall down, and they
all shall fail together.

31:4 For thus hath the LORD spoken unto me, Like as the lion and the
young lion roaring on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is
called forth against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor
abase himself for the noise of them: so shall the LORD of hosts come
down to fight for mount Zion, and for the hill thereof.

31:5 As birds flying, so will the LORD of hosts defend Jerusalem;
defending also he will deliver it; and passing over he will preserve
it.

31:6 Turn ye unto him from whom the children of Israel have deeply
revolted.

31:7 For in that day every man shall cast away his idols of silver,
and his idols of gold, which your own hands have made unto you for a
sin.

31:8 Then shall the Assyrian fall with the sword, not of a mighty man;
and the sword, not of a mean man, shall devour him: but he shall flee
from the sword, and his young men shall be discomfited.

31:9 And he shall pass over to his strong hold for fear, and his
princes shall be afraid of the ensign, saith the LORD, whose fire is
in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem.

32:1 Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall
rule in judgment.

32:2 And a man shall be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert
from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of
a great rock in a weary land.

32:3 And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the ears of
them that hear shall hearken.

32:4 The heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge, and the
tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly.

32:5 The vile person shall be no more called liberal, nor the churl
said to be bountiful.

32:6 For the vile person will speak villany, and his heart will work
iniquity, to practise hypocrisy, and to utter error against the LORD,
to make empty the soul of the hungry, and he will cause the drink of
the thirsty to fail.

32:7 The instruments also of the churl are evil: he deviseth wicked
devices to destroy the poor with lying words, even when the needy
speaketh right.

32:8 But the liberal deviseth liberal things; and by liberal things
shall he stand.

32:9 Rise up, ye women that are at ease; hear my voice, ye careless
daughters; give ear unto my speech.

32:10 Many days and years shall ye be troubled, ye careless women: for
the vintage shall fail, the gathering shall not come.

32:11 Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be troubled, ye careless
ones: strip you, and make you bare, and gird sackcloth upon your
loins.

32:12 They shall lament for the teats, for the pleasant fields, for
the fruitful vine.

32:13 Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briers; yea,
upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city: 32:14 Because the
palaces shall be forsaken; the multitude of the city shall be left;
the forts and towers shall be for dens for ever, a joy of wild asses,
a pasture of flocks; 32:15 Until the spirit be poured upon us from on
high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field
be counted for a forest.

32:16 Then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness
remain in the fruitful field.

32:17 And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of
righteousness quietness and assurance for ever.

32:18 And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure
dwellings, and in quiet resting places; 32:19 When it shall hail,
coming down on the forest; and the city shall be low in a low place.

32:20 Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, that send forth
thither the feet of the ox and the ass.

33:1 Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest
treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee! when thou
shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled; and when thou shalt make
an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.

33:2 O LORD, be gracious unto us; we have waited for thee: be thou
their arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble.

33:3 At the noise of the tumult the people fled; at the lifting up of
thyself the nations were scattered.

33:4 And your spoil shall be gathered like the gathering of the
caterpiller: as the running to and fro of locusts shall he run upon
them.

33:5 The LORD is exalted; for he dwelleth on high: he hath filled Zion
with judgment and righteousness.

33:6 And wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, and
strength of salvation: the fear of the LORD is his treasure.

33:7 Behold, their valiant ones shall cry without: the ambassadors of
peace shall weep bitterly.

33:8 The highways lie waste, the wayfaring man ceaseth: he hath broken
the covenant, he hath despised the cities, he regardeth no man.

33:9 The earth mourneth and languisheth: Lebanon is ashamed and hewn
down: Sharon is like a wilderness; and Bashan and Carmel shake off
their fruits.

33:10 Now will I rise, saith the LORD; now will I be exalted; now will
I lift up myself.

33:11 Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth stubble: your
breath, as fire, shall devour you.

33:12 And the people shall be as the burnings of lime: as thorns cut
up shall they be burned in the fire.

33:13 Hear, ye that are far off, what I have done; and, ye that are
near, acknowledge my might.

33:14 The sinners in Zion are afraid; fearfulness hath surprised the
hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who
among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?  33:15 He that walketh
righteously, and speaketh uprightly; he that despiseth the gain of
oppressions, that shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, that
stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes from
seeing evil; 33:16 He shall dwell on high: his place of defence shall
be the munitions of rocks: bread shall be given him; his waters shall
be sure.

33:17 Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty: they shall behold
the land that is very far off.

33:18 Thine heart shall meditate terror. Where is the scribe? where is
the receiver? where is he that counted the towers?  33:19 Thou shalt
not see a fierce people, a people of a deeper speech than thou canst
perceive; of a stammering tongue, that thou canst not understand.

33:20 Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall
see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken
down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither
shall any of the cords thereof be broken.

33:21 But there the glorious LORD will be unto us a place of broad
rivers and streams; wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither
shall gallant ship pass thereby.

33:22 For the LORD is our judge, the LORD is our lawgiver, the LORD is
our king; he will save us.

33:23 Thy tacklings are loosed; they could not well strengthen their
mast, they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great
spoil divided; the lame take the prey.

33:24 And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the people that
dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.

34:1 Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people: let the
earth hear, and all that is therein; the world, and all things that
come forth of it.

34:2 For the indignation of the LORD is upon all nations, and his fury
upon all their armies: he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath
delivered them to the slaughter.

34:3 Their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up
out of their carcases, and the mountains shall be melted with their
blood.

34:4 And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens
shall be rolled together as a scroll: and all their host shall fall
down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from
the fig tree.

34:5 For my sword shall be bathed in heaven: behold, it shall come
down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment.

34:6 The sword of the LORD is filled with blood, it is made fat with
fatness, and with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the
kidneys of rams: for the LORD hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great
slaughter in the land of Idumea.

34:7 And the unicorns shall come down with them, and the bullocks with
the bulls; and their land shall be soaked with blood, and their dust
made fat with fatness.

34:8 For it is the day of the LORD's vengeance, and the year of
recompences for the controversy of Zion.

34:9 And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the dust
thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become burning
pitch.

34:10 It shall not be quenched night nor day; the smoke thereof shall
go up for ever: from generation to generation it shall lie waste; none
shall pass through it for ever and ever.

34:11 But the cormorant and the bittern shall possess it; the owl also
and the raven shall dwell in it: and he shall stretch out upon it the
line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness.

34:12 They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none
shall be there, and all her princes shall be nothing.

34:13 And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles in
the fortresses thereof: and it shall be an habitation of dragons, and
a court for owls.

34:14 The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild
beasts of the island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; the
screech owl also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of
rest.

34:15 There shall the great owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and
gather under her shadow: there shall the vultures also be gathered,
every one with her mate.

34:16 Seek ye out of the book of the LORD, and read: no one of these
shall fail, none shall want her mate: for my mouth it hath commanded,
and his spirit it hath gathered them.

34:17 And he hath cast the lot for them, and his hand hath divided it
unto them by line: they shall possess it for ever, from generation to
generation shall they dwell therein.

35:1 The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them; and
the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.

35:2 It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and
singing: the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency
of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the glory of the LORD, and the
excellency of our God.

35:3 Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees.

35:4 Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not:
behold, your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompence;
he will come and save you.

35:5 Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the
deaf shall be unstopped.

35:6 Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the
dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams
in the desert.

35:7 And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land
springs of water: in the habitation of dragons, where each lay, shall
be grass with reeds and rushes.

35:8 And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called
The way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall
be for those: the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein.

35:9 No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up
thereon, it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk
there: 35:10 And the ransomed of the LORD shall return, and come to
Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall
obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

36:1 Now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, that
Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the defenced cities of
Judah, and took them.

36:2 And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem
unto king Hezekiah with a great army. And he stood by the conduit of
the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field.

36:3 Then came forth unto him Eliakim, Hilkiah's son, which was over
the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, Asaph's son, the recorder.

36:4 And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye now to Hezekiah, Thus saith
the great king, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this wherein
thou trustest?  36:5 I say, sayest thou, (but they are but vain words)
I have counsel and strength for war: now on whom dost thou trust, that
thou rebellest against me?  36:6 Lo, thou trustest in the staff of
this broken reed, on Egypt; whereon if a man lean, it will go into his
hand, and pierce it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that trust in
him.

36:7 But if thou say to me, We trust in the LORD our God: is it not
he, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and
said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar?
36:8 Now therefore give pledges, I pray thee, to my master the king of
Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on
thy part to set riders upon them.

36:9 How then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least
of my master's servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and
for horsemen?  36:10 And am I now come up without the LORD against
this land to destroy it? the LORD said unto me, Go up against this
land, and destroy it.

36:11 Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah unto Rabshakeh, Speak, I
pray thee, unto thy servants in the Syrian language; for we understand
it: and speak not to us in the Jews' language, in the ears of the
people that are on the wall.

36:12 But Rabshakeh said, Hath my master sent me to thy master and to
thee to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men that sit
upon the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink their own
piss with you?  36:13 Then Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a loud
voice in the Jews' language, and said, Hear ye the words of the great
king, the king of Assyria.

36:14 Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall
not be able to deliver you.

36:15 Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD, saying, The
LORD will surely deliver us: this city shall not be delivered into the
hand of the king of Assyria.

36:16 Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith the king of Assyria,
Make an agreement with me by a present, and come out to me: and eat ye
every one of his vine, and every one of his fig tree, and drink ye
every one the waters of his own cistern; 36:17 Until I come and take
you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land
of bread and vineyards.

36:18 Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, the LORD will deliver
us.

Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand
of the king of Assyria?  36:19 Where are the gods of Hamath and
Arphad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim? and have they delivered
Samaria out of my hand?  36:20 Who are they among all the gods of
these lands, that have delivered their land out of my hand, that the
LORD should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?  36:21 But they held
their peace, and answered him not a word: for the king's commandment
was, saying, Answer him not.

36:22 Then came Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, that was over the
household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the
recorder, to Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words
of Rabshakeh.

37:1 And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he rent
his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the
house of the LORD.

37:2 And he sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and Shebna the
scribe, and the elders of the priests covered with sackcloth, unto
Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.

37:3 And they said unto him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This day is a day of
trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy: for the children are come to
the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

37:4 It may be the LORD thy God will hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom
the king of Assyria his master hath sent to reproach the living God,
and will reprove the words which the LORD thy God hath heard:
wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left.

37:5 So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.

37:6 And Isaiah said unto them, Thus shall ye say unto your master,
Thus saith the LORD, Be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard,
wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.

37:7 Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour,
and return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword
in his own land.

37:8 So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring
against Libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.

37:9 And he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, He is come
forth to make war with thee. And when he heard it, he sent messengers
to Hezekiah, saying, 37:10 Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of
Judah, saying, Let not thy God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee,
saying, Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of
Assyria.

37:11 Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to
all lands by destroying them utterly; and shalt thou be delivered?
37:12 Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers
have destroyed, as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of
Eden which were in Telassar?  37:13 Where is the king of Hamath, and
the king of Arphad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena, and
Ivah?  37:14 And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the
messengers, and read it: and Hezekiah went up unto the house of the
LORD, and spread it before the LORD.

37:15 And Hezekiah prayed unto the LORD, saying, 37:16 O LORD of
hosts, God of Israel, that dwellest between the cherubims, thou art
the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth: thou hast
made heaven and earth.

37:17 Incline thine ear, O LORD, and hear; open thine eyes, O LORD,
and see: and hear all the words of Sennacherib, which hath sent to
reproach the living God.

37:18 Of a truth, LORD, the kings of Assyria have laid waste all the
nations, and their countries, 37:19 And have cast their gods into the
fire: for they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and
stone: therefore they have destroyed them.

37:20 Now therefore, O LORD our God, save us from his hand, that all
the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the LORD, even thou
only.

37:21 Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto Hezekiah, saying, Thus
saith the LORD God of Israel, Whereas thou hast prayed to me against
Sennacherib king of Assyria: 37:22 This is the word which the LORD
hath spoken concerning him; The virgin, the daughter of Zion, hath
despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem
hath shaken her head at thee.

37:23 Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast
thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against
the Holy One of Israel.

37:24 By thy servants hast thou reproached the Lord, and hast said, By
the multitude of my chariots am I come up to the height of the
mountains, to the sides of Lebanon; and I will cut down the tall
cedars thereof, and the choice fir trees thereof: and I will enter
into the height of his border, and the forest of his Carmel.

37:25 I have digged, and drunk water; and with the sole of my feet
have I dried up all the rivers of the besieged places.

37:26 Hast thou not heard long ago, how I have done it; and of ancient
times, that I have formed it? now have I brought it to pass, that thou
shouldest be to lay waste defenced cities into ruinous heaps.

37:27 Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were
dismayed and confounded: they were as the grass of the field, and as
the green herb, as the grass on the housetops, and as corn blasted
before it be grown up.

37:28 But I know thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and
thy rage against me.

37:29 Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult, is come up into
mine ears, therefore will I put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in
thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.

37:30 And this shall be a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat this year such
as groweth of itself; and the second year that which springeth of the
same: and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, and
eat the fruit thereof.

37:31 And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall
again take root downward, and bear fruit upward: 37:32 For out of
Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they that escape out of mount
Zion: the zeal of the LORD of hosts shall do this.

37:33 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the king of Assyria, He
shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come
before it with shields, nor cast a bank against it.

37:34 By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall
not come into this city, saith the LORD.

37:35 For I will defend this city to save it for mine own sake, and
for my servant David's sake.

37:36 Then the angel of the LORD went forth, and smote in the camp of
the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when they
arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.

37:37 So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned,
and dwelt at Nineveh.

37:38 And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of
Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with
the sword; and they escaped into the land of Armenia: and Esarhaddon
his son reigned in his stead.

38:1 In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And Isaiah the
prophet the son of Amoz came unto him, and said unto him, Thus saith
the LORD, Set thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not live.

38:2 Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto
the LORD, 38:3 And said, Remember now, O LORD, I beseech thee, how I
have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have
done that which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept sore.

38:4 Then came the word of the LORD to Isaiah, saying, 38:5 Go, and
say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the LORD, the God of David thy father, I
have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will add unto
thy days fifteen years.

38:6 And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king
of Assyria: and I will defend this city.

38:7 And this shall be a sign unto thee from the LORD, that the LORD
will do this thing that he hath spoken; 38:8 Behold, I will bring
again the shadow of the degrees, which is gone down in the sun dial of
Ahaz, ten degrees backward. So the sun returned ten degrees, by which
degrees it was gone down.

38:9 The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he had been sick, and
was recovered of his sickness: 38:10 I said in the cutting off of my
days, I shall go to the gates of the grave: I am deprived of the
residue of my years.

38:11 I said, I shall not see the LORD, even the LORD, in the land of
the living: I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the
world.

38:12 Mine age is departed, and is removed from me as a shepherd's
tent: I have cut off like a weaver my life: he will cut me off with
pining sickness: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.

38:13 I reckoned till morning, that, as a lion, so will he break all
my bones: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.

38:14 Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a
dove: mine eyes fail with looking upward: O LORD, I am oppressed;
undertake for me.

38:15 What shall I say? he hath both spoken unto me, and himself hath
done it: I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul.

38:16 O LORD, by these things men live, and in all these things is the
life of my spirit: so wilt thou recover me, and make me to live.

38:17 Behold, for peace I had great bitterness: but thou hast in love
to my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption: for thou hast cast
all my sins behind thy back.

38:18 For the grave cannot praise thee, death can not celebrate thee:
they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth.

38:19 The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day:
the father to the children shall make known thy truth.

38:20 The LORD was ready to save me: therefore we will sing my songs
to the stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house of
the LORD.

38:21 For Isaiah had said, Let them take a lump of figs, and lay it
for a plaister upon the boil, and he shall recover.

38:22 Hezekiah also had said, What is the sign that I shall go up to
the house of the LORD?  39:1 At that time Merodachbaladan, the son of
Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah: for
he had heard that he had been sick, and was recovered.

39:2 And Hezekiah was glad of them, and shewed them the house of his
precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the
precious ointment, and all the house of his armour, and all that was
found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in all his
dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not.

39:3 Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto
him, What said these men? and from whence came they unto thee? And
Hezekiah said, They are come from a far country unto me, even from
Babylon.

39:4 Then said he, What have they seen in thine house? And Hezekiah
answered, All that is in mine house have they seen: there is nothing
among my treasures that I have not shewed them.

39:5 Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the word of the LORD of hosts:
39:6 Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that
which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be
carried to Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the LORD.

39:7 And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt
beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace
of the king of Babylon.

39:8 Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good is the word of the LORD which
thou hast spoken. He said moreover, For there shall be peace and truth
in my days.

40:1 Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God.

40:2 Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her
warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath
received of the LORD's hand double for all her sins.

40:3 The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the
way of the LORD, make straight in the desert a highway for our God.

40:4 Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall
be made low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough
places plain: 40:5 And the glory of the LORD shall be revealed, and
all flesh shall see it together: for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken
it.

40:6 The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is
grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field:
40:7 The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: because the spirit of the
LORD bloweth upon it: surely the people is grass.

40:8 The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God
shall stand for ever.

40:9 O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high
mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice
with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of
Judah, Behold your God!  40:10 Behold, the Lord GOD will come with
strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him: behold, his reward is
with him, and his work before him.

40:11 He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the
lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead
those that are with young.

40:12 Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and
meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth
in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a
balance?  40:13 Who hath directed the Spirit of the LORD, or being his
counsellor hath taught him?  40:14 With whom took he counsel, and who
instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him
knowledge, and shewed to him the way of understanding?  40:15 Behold,
the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small
dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little
thing.

40:16 And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof
sufficient for a burnt offering.

40:17 All nations before him are as nothing; and they are counted to
him less than nothing, and vanity.

40:18 To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare
unto him?  40:19 The workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith
spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chains.

40:20 He that is so impoverished that he hath no oblation chooseth a
tree that will not rot; he seeketh unto him a cunning workman to
prepare a graven image, that shall not be moved.

40:21 Have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been told you
from the beginning? have ye not understood from the foundations of the
earth?  40:22 It is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and
the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the
heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in:
40:23 That bringeth the princes to nothing; he maketh the judges of
the earth as vanity.

40:24 Yea, they shall not be planted; yea, they shall not be sown:
yea, their stock shall not take root in the earth: and he shall also
blow upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall take
them away as stubble.

40:25 To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal? saith the
Holy One.

40:26 Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these
things, that bringeth out their host by number: he calleth them all by
names by the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in power;
not one faileth.

40:27 Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, My way is hid
from the LORD, and my judgment is passed over from my God?  40:28 Hast
thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the
LORD, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is
weary? there is no searching of his understanding.

40:29 He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he
increaseth strength.

40:30 Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men
shall utterly fall: 40:31 But they that wait upon the LORD shall renew
their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall
run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint.

41:1 Keep silence before me, O islands; and let the people renew their
strength: let them come near; then let them speak: let us come near
together to judgment.

41:2 Who raised up the righteous man from the east, called him to his
foot, gave the nations before him, and made him rule over kings? he
gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow.

41:3 He pursued them, and passed safely; even by the way that he had
not gone with his feet.

41:4 Who hath wrought and done it, calling the generations from the
beginning? I the LORD, the first, and with the last; I am he.

41:5 The isles saw it, and feared; the ends of the earth were afraid,
drew near, and came.

41:6 They helped every one his neighbour; and every one said to his
brother, Be of good courage.

41:7 So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth
with the hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, It is ready for the
sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved.

41:8 But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the
seed of Abraham my friend.

41:9 Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called
thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my
servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.

41:10 Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy
God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold
thee with the right hand of my righteousness.

41:11 Behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall be
ashamed and confounded: they shall be as nothing; and they that strive
with thee shall perish.

41:12 Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, even them that
contended with thee: they that war against thee shall be as nothing,
and as a thing of nought.

41:13 For I the LORD thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto
thee, Fear not; I will help thee.

41:14 Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help
thee, saith the LORD, and thy redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.

41:15 Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having
teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt
make the hills as chaff.

41:16 Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the
whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt rejoice in the LORD, and
shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel.

41:17 When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their
tongue faileth for thirst, I the LORD will hear them, I the God of
Israel will not forsake them.

41:18 I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of
the valleys: I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry
land springs of water.

41:19 I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah tree, and
the myrtle, and the oil tree; I will set in the desert the fir tree,
and the pine, and the box tree together: 41:20 That they may see, and
know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of the LORD
hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it.

41:21 Produce your cause, saith the LORD; bring forth your strong
reasons, saith the King of Jacob.

41:22 Let them bring them forth, and shew us what shall happen: let
them shew the former things, what they be, that we may consider them,
and know the latter end of them; or declare us things for to come.

41:23 Shew the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know
that ye are gods: yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed,
and behold it together.

41:24 Behold, ye are of nothing, and your work of nought: an
abomination is he that chooseth you.

41:25 I have raised up one from the north, and he shall come: from the
rising of the sun shall he call upon my name: and he shall come upon
princes as upon morter, and as the potter treadeth clay.

41:26 Who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know? and
beforetime, that we may say, He is righteous? yea, there is none that
sheweth, yea, there is none that declareth, yea, there is none that
heareth your words.

41:27 The first shall say to Zion, Behold, behold them: and I will
give to Jerusalem one that bringeth good tidings.

41:28 For I beheld, and there was no man; even among them, and there
was no counsellor, that, when I asked of them, could answer a word.

41:29 Behold, they are all vanity; their works are nothing: their
molten images are wind and confusion.

42:1 Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul
delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth
judgment to the Gentiles.

42:2 He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in
the street.

42:3 A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he
not quench: he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.

42:4 He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment
in the earth: and the isles shall wait for his law.

42:5 Thus saith God the LORD, he that created the heavens, and
stretched them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which
cometh out of it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and
spirit to them that walk therein: 42:6 I the LORD have called thee in
righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give
thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles; 42:7
To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison,
and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.

42:8 I am the LORD: that is my name: and my glory will I not give to
another, neither my praise to graven images.

42:9 Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I
declare: before they spring forth I tell you of them.

42:10 Sing unto the LORD a new song, and his praise from the end of
the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the
isles, and the inhabitants thereof.

42:11 Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their voice,
the villages that Kedar doth inhabit: let the inhabitants of the rock
sing, let them shout from the top of the mountains.

42:12 Let them give glory unto the LORD, and declare his praise in the
islands.

42:13 The LORD shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up
jealousy like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail
against his enemies.

42:14 I have long time holden my peace; I have been still, and
refrained myself: now will I cry like a travailing woman; I will
destroy and devour at once.

42:15 I will make waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their
herbs; and I will make the rivers islands, and I will dry up the
pools.

42:16 And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not; I will
lead them in paths that they have not known: I will make darkness
light before them, and crooked things straight. These things will I do
unto them, and not forsake them.

42:17 They shall be turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed, that
trust in graven images, that say to the molten images, Ye are our
gods.

42:18 Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see.

42:19 Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, as my messenger that I
sent?  who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the LORD's
servant?  42:20 Seeing many things, but thou observest not; opening
the ears, but he heareth not.

42:21 The LORD is well pleased for his righteousness' sake; he will
magnify the law, and make it honourable.

42:22 But this is a people robbed and spoiled; they are all of them
snared in holes, and they are hid in prison houses: they are for a
prey, and none delivereth; for a spoil, and none saith, Restore.

42:23 Who among you will give ear to this? who will hearken and hear
for the time to come?  42:24 Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to
the robbers? did not the LORD, he against whom we have sinned? for
they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his
law.

42:25 Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the
strength of battle: and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he
knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.

43:1 But now thus saith the LORD that created thee, O Jacob, and he
that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have
called thee by thy name; thou art mine.

43:2 When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest
through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee.

43:3 For I am the LORD thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour: I
gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.

43:4 Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable,
and I have loved thee: therefore will I give men for thee, and people
for thy life.

43:5 Fear not: for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the
east, and gather thee from the west; 43:6 I will say to the north,
Give up; and to the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, and
my daughters from the ends of the earth; 43:7 Even every one that is
called by my name: for I have created him for my glory, I have formed
him; yea, I have made him.

43:8 Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that
have ears.

43:9 Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be
assembled: who among them can declare this, and shew us former things?
let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or
let them hear, and say, It is truth.

43:10 Ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD, and my servant whom I have
chosen: that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he:
before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me.

43:11 I, even I, am the LORD; and beside me there is no saviour.

43:12 I have declared, and have saved, and I have shewed, when there
was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the
LORD, that I am God.

43:13 Yea, before the day was I am he; and there is none that can
deliver out of my hand: I will work, and who shall let it?  43:14 Thus
saith the LORD, your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; For your sake I
have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their nobles, and the
Chaldeans, whose cry is in the ships.

43:15 I am the LORD, your Holy One, the creator of Israel, your King.

43:16 Thus saith the LORD, which maketh a way in the sea, and a path
in the mighty waters; 43:17 Which bringeth forth the chariot and
horse, the army and the power; they shall lie down together, they
shall not rise: they are extinct, they are quenched as tow.

43:18 Remember ye not the former things, neither consider the things
of old.

43:19 Behold, I will do a new thing; now it shall spring forth; shall
ye not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers
in the desert.

43:20 The beast of the field shall honour me, the dragons and the
owls: because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the
desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen.

43:21 This people have I formed for myself; they shall shew forth my
praise.

43:22 But thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou hast been
weary of me, O Israel.

43:23 Thou hast not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt
offerings; neither hast thou honoured me with thy sacrifices. I have
not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with
incense.

43:24 Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou
filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices: but thou hast made me to
serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities.
