left.

50:27 Slay all her bullocks; let them go down to the slaughter: woe
unto them! for their day is come, the time of their visitation.

50:28 The voice of them that flee and escape out of the land of
Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of the LORD our God, the
vengeance of his temple.

50:29 Call together the archers against Babylon: all ye that bend the
bow, camp against it round about; let none thereof escape: recompense
her according to her work; according to all that she hath done, do
unto her: for she hath been proud against the LORD, against the Holy
One of Israel.

50:30 Therefore shall her young men fall in the streets, and all her
men of war shall be cut off in that day, saith the LORD.

50:31 Behold, I am against thee, O thou most proud, saith the Lord GOD
of hosts: for thy day is come, the time that I will visit thee.

50:32 And the most proud shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise
him up: and I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it shall devour
all round about him.

50:33 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; The children of Israel and the
children of Judah were oppressed together: and all that took them
captives held them fast; they refused to let them go.

50:34 Their Redeemer is strong; the LORD of hosts is his name: he
shall throughly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the land,
and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.

50:35 A sword is upon the Chaldeans, saith the LORD, and upon the
inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, and upon her wise men.

50:36 A sword is upon the liars; and they shall dote: a sword is upon
her mighty men; and they shall be dismayed.

50:37 A sword is upon their horses, and upon their chariots, and upon
all the mingled people that are in the midst of her; and they shall
become as women: a sword is upon her treasures; and they shall be
robbed.

50:38 A drought is upon her waters; and they shall be dried up: for it
is the land of graven images, and they are mad upon their idols.

50:39 Therefore the wild beasts of the desert with the wild beasts of
the islands shall dwell there, and the owls shall dwell therein: and
it shall be no more inhabited for ever; neither shall it be dwelt in
from generation to generation.

50:40 As God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour cities
thereof, saith the LORD; so shall no man abide there, neither shall
any son of man dwell therein.

50:41 Behold, a people shall come from the north, and a great nation,
and many kings shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth.

50:42 They shall hold the bow and the lance: they are cruel, and will
not shew mercy: their voice shall roar like the sea, and they shall
ride upon horses, every one put in array, like a man to the battle,
against thee, O daughter of Babylon.

50:43 The king of Babylon hath heard the report of them, and his hands
waxed feeble: anguish took hold of him, and pangs as of a woman in
travail.

50:44 Behold, he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of Jordan
unto the habitation of the strong: but I will make them suddenly run
away from her: and who is a chosen man, that I may appoint over her?
for who is like me? and who will appoint me the time? and who is that
shepherd that will stand before me?  50:45 Therefore hear ye the
counsel of the LORD, that he hath taken against Babylon; and his
purposes, that he hath purposed against the land of the Chaldeans:
Surely the least of the flock shall draw them out: surely he shall
make their habitation desolate with them.

50:46 At the noise of the taking of Babylon the earth is moved, and
the cry is heard among the nations.

51:1 Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, and
against them that dwell in the midst of them that rise up against me,
a destroying wind; 51:2 And will send unto Babylon fanners, that shall
fan her, and shall empty her land: for in the day of trouble they
shall be against her round about.

51:3 Against him that bendeth let the archer bend his bow, and against
him that lifteth himself up in his brigandine: and spare ye not her
young men; destroy ye utterly all her host.

51:4 Thus the slain shall fall in the land of the Chaldeans, and they
that are thrust through in her streets.

51:5 For Israel hath not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the
LORD of hosts; though their land was filled with sin against the Holy
One of Israel.

51:6 Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul:
be not cut off in her iniquity; for this is the time of the LORD's
vengeance; he will render unto her a recompence.

51:7 Babylon hath been a golden cup in the LORD's hand, that made all
the earth drunken: the nations have drunken of her wine; therefore the
nations are mad.

51:8 Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed: howl for her; take balm
for her pain, if so be she may be healed.

51:9 We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her,
and let us go every one into his own country: for her judgment
reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies.

51:10 The LORD hath brought forth our righteousness: come, and let us
declare in Zion the work of the LORD our God.

51:11 Make bright the arrows; gather the shields: the LORD hath raised
up the spirit of the kings of the Medes: for his device is against
Babylon, to destroy it; because it is the vengeance of the LORD, the
vengeance of his temple.

51:12 Set up the standard upon the walls of Babylon, make the watch
strong, set up the watchmen, prepare the ambushes: for the LORD hath
both devised and done that which he spake against the inhabitants of
Babylon.

51:13 O thou that dwellest upon many waters, abundant in treasures,
thine end is come, and the measure of thy covetousness.

51:14 The LORD of hosts hath sworn by himself, saying, Surely I will
fill thee with men, as with caterpillers; and they shall lift up a
shout against thee.

51:15 He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the
world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heaven by his
understanding.

51:16 When he uttereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters in
the heavens; and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the
earth: he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out
of his treasures.

51:17 Every man is brutish by his knowledge; every founder is
confounded by the graven image: for his molten image is falsehood, and
there is no breath in them.

51:18 They are vanity, the work of errors: in the time of their
visitation they shall perish.

51:19 The portion of Jacob is not like them; for he is the former of
all things: and Israel is the rod of his inheritance: the LORD of
hosts is his name.

51:20 Thou art my battle axe and weapons of war: for with thee will I
break in pieces the nations, and with thee will I destroy kingdoms;
51:21 And with thee will I break in pieces the horse and his rider;
and with thee will I break in pieces the chariot and his rider; 51:22
With thee also will I break in pieces man and woman; and with thee
will I break in pieces old and young; and with thee will I break in
pieces the young man and the maid; 51:23 I will also break in pieces
with thee the shepherd and his flock; and with thee will I break in
pieces the husbandman and his yoke of oxen; and with thee will I break
in pieces captains and rulers.

51:24 And I will render unto Babylon and to all the inhabitants of
Chaldea all their evil that they have done in Zion in your sight,
saith the LORD.

51:25 Behold, I am against thee, O destroying mountain, saith the
LORD, which destroyest all the earth: and I will stretch out mine hand
upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a
burnt mountain.

51:26 And they shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a
stone for foundations; but thou shalt be desolate for ever, saith the
LORD.

51:27 Set ye up a standard in the land, blow the trumpet among the
nations, prepare the nations against her, call together against her
the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenaz; appoint a captain
against her; cause the horses to come up as the rough caterpillers.

51:28 Prepare against her the nations with the kings of the Medes, the
captains thereof, and all the rulers thereof, and all the land of his
dominion.

51:29 And the land shall tremble and sorrow: for every purpose of the
LORD shall be performed against Babylon, to make the land of Babylon a
desolation without an inhabitant.

51:30 The mighty men of Babylon have forborn to fight, they have
remained in their holds: their might hath failed; they became as
women: they have burned her dwellingplaces; her bars are broken.

51:31 One post shall run to meet another, and one messenger to meet
another, to shew the king of Babylon that his city is taken at one
end, 51:32 And that the passages are stopped, and the reeds they have
burned with fire, and the men of war are affrighted.

51:33 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; The
daughter of Babylon is like a threshingfloor, it is time to thresh
her: yet a little while, and the time of her harvest shall come.

51:34 Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath devoured me, he hath
crushed me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up
like a dragon, he hath filled his belly with my delicates, he hath
cast me out.

51:35 The violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, shall
the inhabitant of Zion say; and my blood upon the inhabitants of
Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say.

51:36 Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will plead thy cause,
and take vengeance for thee; and I will dry up her sea, and make her
springs dry.

51:37 And Babylon shall become heaps, a dwellingplace for dragons, an
astonishment, and an hissing, without an inhabitant.

51:38 They shall roar together like lions: they shall yell as lions'
whelps.

51:39 In their heat I will make their feasts, and I will make them
drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not
wake, saith the LORD.

51:40 I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, like rams
with he goats.

51:41 How is Sheshach taken! and how is the praise of the whole earth
surprised! how is Babylon become an astonishment among the nations!
51:42 The sea is come up upon Babylon: she is covered with the
multitude of the waves thereof.

51:43 Her cities are a desolation, a dry land, and a wilderness, a
land wherein no man dwelleth, neither doth any son of man pass
thereby.

51:44 And I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I will bring forth out of
his mouth that which he hath swallowed up: and the nations shall not
flow together any more unto him: yea, the wall of Babylon shall fall.

51:45 My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every
man his soul from the fierce anger of the LORD.

51:46 And lest your heart faint, and ye fear for the rumour that shall
be heard in the land; a rumour shall both come one year, and after
that in another year shall come a rumour, and violence in the land,
ruler against ruler.

51:47 Therefore, behold, the days come, that I will do judgment upon
the graven images of Babylon: and her whole land shall be confounded,
and all her slain shall fall in the midst of her.

51:48 Then the heaven and the earth, and all that is therein, shall
sing for Babylon: for the spoilers shall come unto her from the north,
saith the LORD.

51:49 As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at
Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth.

51:50 Ye that have escaped the sword, go away, stand not still:
remember the LORD afar off, and let Jerusalem come into your mind.

51:51 We are confounded, because we have heard reproach: shame hath
covered our faces: for strangers are come into the sanctuaries of the
LORD's house.

51:52 Wherefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will do
judgment upon her graven images: and through all her land the wounded
shall groan.

51:53 Though Babylon should mount up to heaven, and though she should
fortify the height of her strength, yet from me shall spoilers come
unto her, saith the LORD.

51:54 A sound of a cry cometh from Babylon, and great destruction from
the land of the Chaldeans: 51:55 Because the LORD hath spoiled
Babylon, and destroyed out of her the great voice; when her waves do
roar like great waters, a noise of their voice is uttered: 51:56
Because the spoiler is come upon her, even upon Babylon, and her
mighty men are taken, every one of their bows is broken: for the LORD
God of recompences shall surely requite.

51:57 And I will make drunk her princes, and her wise men, her
captains, and her rulers, and her mighty men: and they shall sleep a
perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the King, whose name is the LORD
of hosts.

51:58 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; The broad walls of Babylon shall
be utterly broken, and her high gates shall be burned with fire; and
the people shall labour in vain, and the folk in the fire, and they
shall be weary.

51:59 The word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded Seraiah the son of
Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, when he went with Zedekiah the king of
Judah into Babylon in the fourth year of his reign. And this Seraiah
was a quiet prince.

51:60 So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that should come upon
Babylon, even all these words that are written against Babylon.

51:61 And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When thou comest to Babylon, and
shalt see, and shalt read all these words; 51:62 Then shalt thou say,
O LORD, thou hast spoken against this place, to cut it off, that none
shall remain in it, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be
desolate for ever.

51:63 And it shall be, when thou hast made an end of reading this
book, that thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst
of Euphrates: 51:64 And thou shalt say, Thus shall Babylon sink, and
shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her: and they
shall be weary. Thus far are the words of Jeremiah.

52:1 Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was
Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

52:2 And he did that which was evil in the eyes of the LORD, according
to all that Jehoiakim had done.

52:3 For through the anger of the LORD it came to pass in Jerusalem
and Judah, till he had cast them out from his presence, that Zedekiah
rebelled against the king of Babylon.

52:4 And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth
month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and pitched
against it, and built forts against it round about.

52:5 So the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah.

52:6 And in the fourth month, in the ninth day of the month, the
famine was sore in the city, so that there was no bread for the people
of the land.

52:7 Then the city was broken up, and all the men of war fled, and
went forth out of the city by night by the way of the gate between the
two walls, which was by the king's garden; (now the Chaldeans were by
the city round about:) and they went by the way of the plain.

52:8 But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king, and
overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and all his army was
scattered from him.

52:9 Then they took the king, and carried him up unto the king of
Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath; where he gave judgment upon
him.

52:10 And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before his
eyes: he slew also all the princes of Judah in Riblah.

52:11 Then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah; and the king of Babylon
bound him in chains, and carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison
till the day of his death.

52:12 Now in the fifth month, in the tenth day of the month, which was
the nineteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, came
Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, which served the king of Babylon,
into Jerusalem, 52:13 And burned the house of the LORD, and the king's
house; and all the houses of Jerusalem, and all the houses of the
great men, burned he with fire: 52:14 And all the army of the
Chaldeans, that were with the captain of the guard, brake down all the
walls of Jerusalem round about.

52:15 Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive
certain of the poor of the people, and the residue of the people that
remained in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to the king
of Babylon, and the rest of the multitude.

52:16 But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left certain of the
poor of the land for vinedressers and for husbandmen.

52:17 Also the pillars of brass that were in the house of the LORD,
and the bases, and the brasen sea that was in the house of the LORD,
the Chaldeans brake, and carried all the brass of them to Babylon.

52:18 The caldrons also, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the
bowls, and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass wherewith they
ministered, took they away.

52:19 And the basons, and the firepans, and the bowls, and the
caldrons, and the candlesticks, and the spoons, and the cups; that
which was of gold in gold, and that which was of silver in silver,
took the captain of the guard away.

52:20 The two pillars, one sea, and twelve brasen bulls that were
under the bases, which king Solomon had made in the house of the LORD:
the brass of all these vessels was without weight.

52:21 And concerning the pillars, the height of one pillar was
eighteen cubits; and a fillet of twelve cubits did compass it; and the
thickness thereof was four fingers: it was hollow.

52:22 And a chapiter of brass was upon it; and the height of one
chapiter was five cubits, with network and pomegranates upon the
chapiters round about, all of brass. The second pillar also and the
pomegranates were like unto these.

52:23 And there were ninety and six pomegranates on a side; and all
the pomegranates upon the network were an hundred round about.

52:24 And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and
Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the door: 52:25
He took also out of the city an eunuch, which had the charge of the
men of war; and seven men of them that were near the king's person,
which were found in the city; and the principal scribe of the host,
who mustered the people of the land; and threescore men of the people
of the land, that were found in the midst of the city.

52:26 So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them, and brought
them to the king of Babylon to Riblah.

52:27 And the king of Babylon smote them, and put them to death in
Riblah in the land of Hamath. Thus Judah was carried away captive out
of his own land.

52:28 This is the people whom Nebuchadrezzar carried away captive: in
the seventh year three thousand Jews and three and twenty: 52:29 In
the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar he carried away captive from
Jerusalem eight hundred thirty and two persons: 52:30 In the three and
twentieth year of Nebuchadrezzar Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard
carried away captive of the Jews seven hundred forty and five persons:
all the persons were four thousand and six hundred.

52:31 And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the
captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the
five and twentieth day of the month, that Evilmerodach king of Babylon
in the first year of his reign lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king
of Judah, and brought him forth out of prison.

52:32 And spake kindly unto him, and set his throne above the throne
of the kings that were with him in Babylon, 52:33 And changed his
prison garments: and he did continually eat bread before him all the
days of his life.

52:34 And for his diet, there was a continual diet given him of the
king of Babylon, every day a portion until the day of his death, all
the days of his life.




The Lamentations of Jeremiah


1:1 How doth the city sit solitary, that was full of people! how is
she become as a widow! she that was great among the nations, and
princess among the provinces, how is she become tributary!  1:2 She
weepeth sore in the night, and her tears are on her cheeks: among all
her lovers she hath none to comfort her: all her friends have dealt
treacherously with her, they are become her enemies.

1:3 Judah is gone into captivity because of affliction, and because of
great servitude: she dwelleth among the heathen, she findeth no rest:
all her persecutors overtook her between the straits.

1:4 The ways of Zion do mourn, because none come to the solemn feasts:
all her gates are desolate: her priests sigh, her virgins are
afflicted, and she is in bitterness.

1:5 Her adversaries are the chief, her enemies prosper; for the LORD
hath afflicted her for the multitude of her transgressions: her
children are gone into captivity before the enemy.

1:6 And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed: her
princes are become like harts that find no pasture, and they are gone
without strength before the pursuer.

1:7 Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction and of her
miseries all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old, when
her people fell into the hand of the enemy, and none did help her: the
adversaries saw her, and did mock at her sabbaths.

1:8 Jerusalem hath grievously sinned; therefore she is removed: all
that honoured her despise her, because they have seen her nakedness:
yea, she sigheth, and turneth backward.

1:9 Her filthiness is in her skirts; she remembereth not her last end;
therefore she came down wonderfully: she had no comforter. O LORD,
behold my affliction: for the enemy hath magnified himself.

1:10 The adversary hath spread out his hand upon all her pleasant
things: for she hath seen that the heathen entered into her sanctuary,
whom thou didst command that they should not enter into thy
congregation.

1:11 All her people sigh, they seek bread; they have given their
pleasant things for meat to relieve the soul: see, O LORD, and
consider; for I am become vile.

1:12 Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold, and see if
there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me,
wherewith the LORD hath afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger.

1:13 From above hath he sent fire into my bones, and it prevaileth
against them: he hath spread a net for my feet, he hath turned me
back: he hath made me desolate and faint all the day.

1:14 The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand: they are
wreathed, and come up upon my neck: he hath made my strength to fall,
the LORD hath delivered me into their hands, from whom I am not able
to rise up.

1:15 The LORD hath trodden under foot all my mighty men in the midst
of me: he hath called an assembly against me to crush my young men:
the LORD hath trodden the virgin, the daughter of Judah, as in a
winepress.

1:16 For these things I weep; mine eye, mine eye runneth down with
water, because the comforter that should relieve my soul is far from
me: my children are desolate, because the enemy prevailed.

1:17 Zion spreadeth forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her:
the LORD hath commanded concerning Jacob, that his adversaries should
be round about him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman among them.

1:18 The LORD is righteous; for I have rebelled against his
commandment: hear, I pray you, all people, and behold my sorrow: my
virgins and my young men are gone into captivity.

1:19 I called for my lovers, but they deceived me: my priests and mine
elders gave up the ghost in the city, while they sought their meat to
relieve their souls.

1:20 Behold, O LORD; for I am in distress: my bowels are troubled;
mine heart is turned within me; for I have grievously rebelled: abroad
the sword bereaveth, at home there is as death.

1:21 They have heard that I sigh: there is none to comfort me: all
mine enemies have heard of my trouble; they are glad that thou hast
done it: thou wilt bring the day that thou hast called, and they shall
be like unto me.

1:22 Let all their wickedness come before thee; and do unto them, as
thou hast done unto me for all my transgressions: for my sighs are
many, and my heart is faint.

2:1 How hath the LORD covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his
anger, and cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty of Israel,
and remembered not his footstool in the day of his anger!  2:2 The
LORD hath swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, and hath not
pitied: he hath thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the
daughter of Judah; he hath brought them down to the ground: he hath
polluted the kingdom and the princes thereof.

2:3 He hath cut off in his fierce anger all the horn of Israel: he
hath drawn back his right hand from before the enemy, and he burned
against Jacob like a flaming fire, which devoureth round about.

2:4 He hath bent his bow like an enemy: he stood with his right hand
as an adversary, and slew all that were pleasant to the eye in the
tabernacle of the daughter of Zion: he poured out his fury like fire.

2:5 The LORD was as an enemy: he hath swallowed up Israel, he hath
swallowed up all her palaces: he hath destroyed his strong holds, and
hath increased in the daughter of Judah mourning and lamentation.

2:6 And he hath violently taken away his tabernacle, as if it were of
a garden: he hath destroyed his places of the assembly: the LORD hath
caused the solemn feasts and sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and
hath despised in the indignation of his anger the king and the priest.

2:7 The LORD hath cast off his altar, he hath abhorred his sanctuary,
he hath given up into the hand of the enemy the walls of her palaces;
they have made a noise in the house of the LORD, as in the day of a
solemn feast.

2:8 The LORD hath purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of
Zion: he hath stretched out a line, he hath not withdrawn his hand
from destroying: therefore he made the rampart and the wall to lament;
they languished together.

2:9 Her gates are sunk into the ground; he hath destroyed and broken
her bars: her king and her princes are among the Gentiles: the law is
no more; her prophets also find no vision from the LORD.

2:10 The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground, and keep
silence: they have cast up dust upon their heads; they have girded
themselves with sackcloth: the virgins of Jerusalem hang down their
heads to the ground.

2:11 Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is
poured upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my
people; because the children and the sucklings swoon in the streets of
the city.

2:12 They say to their mothers, Where is corn and wine? when they
swooned as the wounded in the streets of the city, when their soul was
poured out into their mothers' bosom.

2:13 What thing shall I take to witness for thee? what thing shall I
liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? what shall I equal to thee,
that I may comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? for thy breach is
great like the sea: who can heal thee?  2:14 Thy prophets have seen
vain and foolish things for thee: and they have not discovered thine
iniquity, to turn away thy captivity; but have seen for thee false
burdens and causes of banishment.

2:15 All that pass by clap their hands at thee; they hiss and wag
their head at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the city that
men call The perfection of beauty, The joy of the whole earth?  2:16
All thine enemies have opened their mouth against thee: they hiss and
gnash the teeth: they say, We have swallowed her up: certainly this is
the day that we looked for; we have found, we have seen it.

2:17 The LORD hath done that which he had devised; he hath fulfilled
his word that he had commanded in the days of old: he hath thrown
down, and hath not pitied: and he hath caused thine enemy to rejoice
over thee, he hath set up the horn of thine adversaries.

2:18 Their heart cried unto the LORD, O wall of the daughter of Zion,
let tears run down like a river day and night: give thyself no rest;
let not the apple of thine eye cease.

2:19 Arise, cry out in the night: in the beginning of the watches pour
out thine heart like water before the face of the LORD: lift up thy
hands toward him for the life of thy young children, that faint for
hunger in the top of every street.

2:20 Behold, O LORD, and consider to whom thou hast done this. Shall
the women eat their fruit, and children of a span long? shall the
priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of the Lord?  2:21
The young and the old lie on the ground in the streets: my virgins and
my young men are fallen by the sword; thou hast slain them in the day
of thine anger; thou hast killed, and not pitied.

2:22 Thou hast called as in a solemn day my terrors round about, so
that in the day of the LORD's anger none escaped nor remained: those
that I have swaddled and brought up hath mine enemy consumed.

3:1 I AM the man that hath seen affliction by the rod of his wrath.

3:2 He hath led me, and brought me into darkness, but not into light.

3:3 Surely against me is he turned; he turneth his hand against me all
the day.

3:4 My flesh and my skin hath he made old; he hath broken my bones.

3:5 He hath builded against me, and compassed me with gall and
travail.

3:6 He hath set me in dark places, as they that be dead of old.

3:7 He hath hedged me about, that I cannot get out: he hath made my
chain heavy.

3:8 Also when I cry and shout, he shutteth out my prayer.

3:9 He hath inclosed my ways with hewn stone, he hath made my paths
crooked.

3:10 He was unto me as a bear lying in wait, and as a lion in secret
places.

3:11 He hath turned aside my ways, and pulled me in pieces: he hath
made me desolate.

3:12 He hath bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow.

3:13 He hath caused the arrows of his quiver to enter into my reins.

3:14 I was a derision to all my people; and their song all the day.

3:15 He hath filled me with bitterness, he hath made me drunken with
wormwood.

3:16 He hath also broken my teeth with gravel stones, he hath covered
me with ashes.

3:17 And thou hast removed my soul far off from peace: I forgat
prosperity.

3:18 And I said, My strength and my hope is perished from the LORD:
3:19 Remembering mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the
gall.

3:20 My soul hath them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me.

3:21 This I recall to my mind, therefore have I hope.

3:22 It is of the LORD's mercies that we are not consumed, because his
compassions fail not.

3:23 They are new every morning: great is thy faithfulness.

3:24 The LORD is my portion, saith my soul; therefore will I hope in
him.

3:25 The LORD is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that
seeketh him.

3:26 It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the
salvation of the LORD.

3:27 It is good for a man that he bear the yoke of his youth.

3:28 He sitteth alone and keepeth silence, because he hath borne it
upon him.

3:29 He putteth his mouth in the dust; if so be there may be hope.

3:30 He giveth his cheek to him that smiteth him: he is filled full
with reproach.

3:31 For the LORD will not cast off for ever: 3:32 But though he cause
grief, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his
mercies.

3:33 For he doth not afflict willingly nor grieve the children of men.

3:34 To crush under his feet all the prisoners of the earth.

3:35 To turn aside the right of a man before the face of the most
High, 3:36 To subvert a man in his cause, the LORD approveth not.

3:37 Who is he that saith, and it cometh to pass, when the Lord
commandeth it not?  3:38 Out of the mouth of the most High proceedeth
not evil and good?  3:39 Wherefore doth a living man complain, a man
for the punishment of his sins?  3:40 Let us search and try our ways,
and turn again to the LORD.

3:41 Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the heavens.

3:42 We have transgressed and have rebelled: thou hast not pardoned.

3:43 Thou hast covered with anger, and persecuted us: thou hast slain,
thou hast not pitied.

3:44 Thou hast covered thyself with a cloud, that our prayer should
not pass through.

3:45 Thou hast made us as the offscouring and refuse in the midst of
the people.

3:46 All our enemies have opened their mouths against us.

3:47 Fear and a snare is come upon us, desolation and destruction.

3:48 Mine eye runneth down with rivers of water for the destruction of
the daughter of my people.

3:49 Mine eye trickleth down, and ceaseth not, without any
intermission.

3:50 Till the LORD look down, and behold from heaven.

3:51 Mine eye affecteth mine heart because of all the daughters of my
city.

3:52 Mine enemies chased me sore, like a bird, without cause.

3:53 They have cut off my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone upon
me.

3:54 Waters flowed over mine head; then I said, I am cut off.

3:55 I called upon thy name, O LORD, out of the low dungeon.

3:56 Thou hast heard my voice: hide not thine ear at my breathing, at
my cry.

3:57 Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee: thou
saidst, Fear not.

3:58 O LORD, thou hast pleaded the causes of my soul; thou hast
redeemed my life.

3:59 O LORD, thou hast seen my wrong: judge thou my cause.

3:60 Thou hast seen all their vengeance and all their imaginations
against me.

3:61 Thou hast heard their reproach, O LORD, and all their
imaginations against me; 3:62 The lips of those that rose up against
me, and their device against me all the day.

3:63 Behold their sitting down, and their rising up; I am their
musick.

3:64 Render unto them a recompence, O LORD, according to the work of
their hands.

3:65 Give them sorrow of heart, thy curse unto them.

3:66 Persecute and destroy them in anger from under the heavens of the
LORD.

4:1 How is the gold become dim! how is the most fine gold changed! the
stones of the sanctuary are poured out in the top of every street.

4:2 The precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, how are they
esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the potter!
4:3 Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their
young ones: the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the
ostriches in the wilderness.

4:4 The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to the roof of his mouth
for thirst: the young children ask bread, and no man breaketh it unto
them.

4:5 They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets: they
that were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills.

4:6 For the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people is
greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown
as in a moment, and no hands stayed on her.

4:7 Her Nazarites were purer than snow, they were whiter than milk,
they were more ruddy in body than rubies, their polishing was of
sapphire: 4:8 Their visage is blacker than a coal; they are not known
in the streets: their skin cleaveth to their bones; it is withered, it
is become like a stick.

4:9 They that be slain with the sword are better than they that be
slain with hunger: for these pine away, stricken through for want of
the fruits of the field.

4:10 The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children:
they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people.

4:11 The LORD hath accomplished his fury; he hath poured out his
fierce anger, and hath kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath devoured
the foundations thereof.

4:12 The kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world,
would not have believed that the adversary and the enemy should have
entered into the gates of Jerusalem.

4:13 For the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of her priests,
that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of her, 4:14 They
have wandered as blind men in the streets, they have polluted
themselves with blood, so that men could not touch their garments.

4:15 They cried unto them, Depart ye; it is unclean; depart, depart,
touch not: when they fled away and wandered, they said among the
heathen, They shall no more sojourn there.

4:16 The anger of the LORD hath divided them; he will no more regard
them: they respected not the persons of the priests, they favoured not
the elders.

4:17 As for us, our eyes as yet failed for our vain help: in our
watching we have watched for a nation that could not save us.

4:18 They hunt our steps, that we cannot go in our streets: our end is
near, our days are fulfilled; for our end is come.

4:19 Our persecutors are swifter than the eagles of the heaven: they
pursued us upon the mountains, they laid wait for us in the
wilderness.

4:20 The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the LORD, was taken
in their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among
the heathen.

4:21 Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom, that dwellest in the
land of Uz; the cup also shall pass through unto thee: thou shalt be
drunken, and shalt make thyself naked.

4:22 The punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O daughter of
Zion; he will no more carry thee away into captivity: he will visit
thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom; he will discover thy sins.

5:1 Remember, O LORD, what is come upon us: consider, and behold our
reproach.

5:2 Our inheritance is turned to strangers, our houses to aliens.

5:3 We are orphans and fatherless, our mothers are as widows.

5:4 We have drunken our water for money; our wood is sold unto us.

5:5 Our necks are under persecution: we labour, and have no rest.

5:6 We have given the hand to the Egyptians, and to the Assyrians, to
be satisfied with bread.

5:7 Our fathers have sinned, and are not; and we have borne their
iniquities.

5:8 Servants have ruled over us: there is none that doth deliver us
out of their hand.

5:9 We gat our bread with the peril of our lives because of the sword
of the wilderness.

5:10 Our skin was black like an oven because of the terrible famine.

5:11 They ravished the women in Zion, and the maids in the cities of
Judah.

5:12 Princes are hanged up by their hand: the faces of elders were not
honoured.

5:13 They took the young men to grind, and the children fell under the
wood.

5:14 The elders have ceased from the gate, the young men from their
musick.

5:15 The joy of our heart is ceased; our dance is turned into
mourning.

5:16 The crown is fallen from our head: woe unto us, that we have
sinned!  5:17 For this our heart is faint; for these things our eyes
are dim.

5:18 Because of the mountain of Zion, which is desolate, the foxes
walk upon it.

5:19 Thou, O LORD, remainest for ever; thy throne from generation to
generation.

5:20 Wherefore dost thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long
time?  5:21 Turn thou us unto thee, O LORD, and we shall be turned;
renew our days as of old.

5:22 But thou hast utterly rejected us; thou art very wroth against us.




The Book of the Prophet Ezekiel


1:1 Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month,
in the fifth day of the month, as I was among the captives by the river
of Chebar, that the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.

1:2 In the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of king
Jehoiachin's captivity, 1:3 The word of the LORD came expressly unto
Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by
the river Chebar; and the hand of the LORD was there upon him.

1:4 And I looked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a
great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about
it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the
midst of the fire.

1:5 Also out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four living
creatures. And this was their appearance; they had the likeness of a
man.

1:6 And every one had four faces, and every one had four wings.

1:7 And their feet were straight feet; and the sole of their feet was
like the sole of a calf's foot: and they sparkled like the colour of
burnished brass.

1:8 And they had the hands of a man under their wings on their four
sides; and they four had their faces and their wings.

1:9 Their wings were joined one to another; they turned not when they
went; they went every one straight forward.

1:10 As for the likeness of their faces, they four had the face of a
man, and the face of a lion, on the right side: and they four had the
face of an ox on the left side; they four also had the face of an
eagle.

1:11 Thus were their faces: and their wings were stretched upward; two
wings of every one were joined one to another, and two covered their
bodies.

1:12 And they went every one straight forward: whither the spirit was
to go, they went; and they turned not when they went.

1:13 As for the likeness of the living creatures, their appearance was
like burning coals of fire, and like the appearance of lamps: it went
up and down among the living creatures; and the fire was bright, and
out of the fire went forth lightning.

1:14 And the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a
flash of lightning.

1:15 Now as I beheld the living creatures, behold one wheel upon the
earth by the living creatures, with his four faces.

1:16 The appearance of the wheels and their work was like unto the
colour of a beryl: and they four had one likeness: and their
appearance and their work was as it were a wheel in the middle of a
wheel.

1:17 When they went, they went upon their four sides: and they turned
not when they went.

1:18 As for their rings, they were so high that they were dreadful;
and their rings were full of eyes round about them four.

1:19 And when the living creatures went, the wheels went by them: and
when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels
were lifted up.

1:20 Whithersoever the spirit was to go, they went, thither was their
spirit to go; and the wheels were lifted up over against them: for the
spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.

1:21 When those went, these went; and when those stood, these stood;
