24:3 And utter a parable unto the rebellious house, and say unto them,
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Set on a pot, set it on, and also pour water
into it: 24:4 Gather the pieces thereof into it, even every good
piece, the thigh, and the shoulder; fill it with the choice bones.

24:5 Take the choice of the flock, and burn also the bones under it,
and make it boil well, and let them seethe the bones of it therein.

24:6 Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the bloody city, to the
pot whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it! bring
it out piece by piece; let no lot fall upon it.

24:7 For her blood is in the midst of her; she set it upon the top of
a rock; she poured it not upon the ground, to cover it with dust; 24:8
That it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance; I have set her
blood upon the top of a rock, that it should not be covered.

24:9 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the bloody city! I will
even make the pile for fire great.

24:10 Heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume the flesh, and spice it
well, and let the bones be burned.

24:11 Then set it empty upon the coals thereof, that the brass of it
may be hot, and may burn, and that the filthiness of it may be molten
in it, that the scum of it may be consumed.

24:12 She hath wearied herself with lies, and her great scum went not
forth out of her: her scum shall be in the fire.

24:13 In thy filthiness is lewdness: because I have purged thee, and
thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthiness any
more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee.

24:14 I the LORD have spoken it: it shall come to pass, and I will do
it; I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent;
according to thy ways, and according to thy doings, shall they judge
thee, saith the Lord GOD.

24:15 Also the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 24:16 Son of
man, behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a
stroke: yet neither shalt thou mourn nor weep, neither shall thy tears
run down.

24:17 Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of
thine head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover
not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men.

24:18 So I spake unto the people in the morning: and at even my wife
died; and I did in the morning as I was commanded.

24:19 And the people said unto me, Wilt thou not tell us what these
things are to us, that thou doest so?  24:20 Then I answered them, The
word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 24:21 Speak unto the house of
Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will profane my sanctuary,
the excellency of your strength, the desire of your eyes, and that
which your soul pitieth; and your sons and your daughters whom ye have
left shall fall by the sword.

24:22 And ye shall do as I have done: ye shall not cover your lips,
nor eat the bread of men.

24:23 And your tires shall be upon your heads, and your shoes upon
your feet: ye shall not mourn nor weep; but ye shall pine away for
your iniquities, and mourn one toward another.

24:24 Thus Ezekiel is unto you a sign: according to all that he hath
done shall ye do: and when this cometh, ye shall know that I am the
Lord GOD.

24:25 Also, thou son of man, shall it not be in the day when I take
from them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their
eyes, and that whereupon they set their minds, their sons and their
daughters, 24:26 That he that escapeth in that day shall come unto
thee, to cause thee to hear it with thine ears?  24:27 In that day
shall thy mouth be opened to him which is escaped, and thou shalt
speak, and be no more dumb: and thou shalt be a sign unto them; and
they shall know that I am the LORD.

25:1 The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 25:2 Son of man,
set thy face against the Ammonites, and prophesy against them; 25:3
And say unto the Ammonites, Hear the word of the Lord GOD; Thus saith
the Lord GOD; Because thou saidst, Aha, against my sanctuary, when it
was profaned; and against the land of Israel, when it was desolate;
and against the house of Judah, when they went into captivity; 25:4
Behold, therefore I will deliver thee to the men of the east for a
possession, and they shall set their palaces in thee, and make their
dwellings in thee: they shall eat thy fruit, and they shall drink thy
milk.

25:5 And I will make Rabbah a stable for camels, and the Ammonites a
couching place for flocks: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

25:6 For thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast clapped thine
hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced in heart with all thy
despite against the land of Israel; 25:7 Behold, therefore I will
stretch out mine hand upon thee, and will deliver thee for a spoil to
the heathen; and I will cut thee off from the people, and I will cause
thee to perish out of the countries: I will destroy thee; and thou
shalt know that I am the LORD.

25:8 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because that Moab and Seir do say,
Behold, the house of Judah is like unto all the heathen; 25:9
Therefore, behold, I will open the side of Moab from the cities, from
his cities which are on his frontiers, the glory of the country,
Bethjeshimoth, Baalmeon, and Kiriathaim, 25:10 Unto the men of the
east with the Ammonites, and will give them in possession, that the
Ammonites may not be remembered among the nations.

25:11 And I will execute judgments upon Moab; and they shall know that
I am the LORD.

25:12 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because that Edom hath dealt against
the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and hath greatly offended, and
revenged himself upon them; 25:13 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I
will also stretch out mine hand upon Edom, and will cut off man and
beast from it; and I will make it desolate from Teman; and they of
Dedan shall fall by the sword.

25:14 And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people
Israel: and they shall do in Edom according to mine anger and
according to my fury; and they shall know my vengeance, saith the Lord
GOD.

25:15 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because the Philistines have dealt by
revenge, and have taken vengeance with a despiteful heart, to destroy
it for the old hatred; 25:16 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I will stretch out mine hand upon the Philistines, and I will
cut off the Cherethims, and destroy the remnant of the sea coast.

25:17 And I will execute great vengeance upon them with furious
rebukes; and they shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall lay my
vengeance upon them.

26:1 And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first day of the
month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 26:2 Son of
man, because that Tyrus hath said against Jerusalem, Aha, she is
broken that was the gates of the people: she is turned unto me: I
shall be replenished, now she is laid waste: 26:3 Therefore thus saith
the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, O Tyrus, and will cause many
nations to come up against thee, as the sea causeth his waves to come
up.

26:4 And they shall destroy the walls of Tyrus, and break down her
towers: I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the
top of a rock.

26:5 It shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of the
sea: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD: and it shall become a
spoil to the nations.

26:6 And her daughters which are in the field shall be slain by the
sword; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

26:7 For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will bring upon Tyrus
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, a king of kings, from the north, with
horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and companies, and much
people.

26:8 He shall slay with the sword thy daughters in the field: and he
shall make a fort against thee, and cast a mount against thee, and
lift up the buckler against thee.

26:9 And he shall set engines of war against thy walls, and with his
axes he shall break down thy towers.

26:10 By reason of the abundance of his horses their dust shall cover
thee: thy walls shall shake at the noise of the horsemen, and of the
wheels, and of the chariots, when he shall enter into thy gates, as
men enter into a city wherein is made a breach.

26:11 With the hoofs of his horses shall he tread down all thy
streets: he shall slay thy people by the sword, and thy strong
garrisons shall go down to the ground.

26:12 And they shall make a spoil of thy riches, and make a prey of
thy merchandise: and they shall break down thy walls, and destroy thy
pleasant houses: and they shall lay thy stones and thy timber and thy
dust in the midst of the water.

26:13 And I will cause the noise of thy songs to cease; and the sound
of thy harps shall be no more heard.

26:14 And I will make thee like the top of a rock: thou shalt be a
place to spread nets upon; thou shalt be built no more: for I the LORD
have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD.

26:15 Thus saith the Lord GOD to Tyrus; Shall not the isles shake at
the sound of thy fall, when the wounded cry, when the slaughter is
made in the midst of thee?  26:16 Then all the princes of the sea
shall come down from their thrones, and lay away their robes, and put
off their broidered garments: they shall clothe themselves with
trembling; they shall sit upon the ground, and shall tremble at every
moment, and be astonished at thee.

26:17 And they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and say to thee,
How art thou destroyed, that wast inhabited of seafaring men, the
renowned city, which wast strong in the sea, she and her inhabitants,
which cause their terror to be on all that haunt it!  26:18 Now shall
the isles tremble in the day of thy fall; yea, the isles that are in
the sea shall be troubled at thy departure.

26:19 For thus saith the Lord GOD; When I shall make thee a desolate
city, like the cities that are not inhabited; when I shall bring up
the deep upon thee, and great waters shall cover thee; 26:20 When I
shall bring thee down with them that descend into the pit, with the
people of old time, and shall set thee in the low parts of the earth,
in places desolate of old, with them that go down to the pit, that
thou be not inhabited; and I shall set glory in the land of the
living; 26:21 I will make thee a terror, and thou shalt be no more:
though thou be sought for, yet shalt thou never be found again, saith
the Lord GOD.

27:1 The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 27:2 Now, thou
son of man, take up a lamentation for Tyrus; 27:3 And say unto Tyrus,
O thou that art situate at the entry of the sea, which art a merchant
of the people for many isles, Thus saith the Lord GOD; O Tyrus, thou
hast said, I am of perfect beauty.

27:4 Thy borders are in the midst of the seas, thy builders have
perfected thy beauty.

27:5 They have made all thy ship boards of fir trees of Senir: they
have taken cedars from Lebanon to make masts for thee.

27:6 Of the oaks of Bashan have they made thine oars; the company of
the Ashurites have made thy benches of ivory, brought out of the isles
of Chittim.

27:7 Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was that which thou
spreadest forth to be thy sail; blue and purple from the isles of
Elishah was that which covered thee.

27:8 The inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad were thy mariners: thy wise
men, O Tyrus, that were in thee, were thy pilots.

27:9 The ancients of Gebal and the wise men thereof were in thee thy
calkers: all the ships of the sea with their mariners were in thee to
occupy thy merchandise.

27:10 They of Persia and of Lud and of Phut were in thine army, thy
men of war: they hanged the shield and helmet in thee; they set forth
thy comeliness.

27:11 The men of Arvad with thine army were upon thy walls round
about, and the Gammadims were in thy towers: they hanged their shields
upon thy walls round about; they have made thy beauty perfect.

27:12 Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of all kind
of riches; with silver, iron, tin, and lead, they traded in thy fairs.

27:13 Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy merchants: they traded
the persons of men and vessels of brass in thy market.

27:14 They of the house of Togarmah traded in thy fairs with horses
and horsemen and mules.

27:15 The men of Dedan were thy merchants; many isles were the
merchandise of thine hand: they brought thee for a present horns of
ivory and ebony.

27:16 Syria was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of the wares
of thy making: they occupied in thy fairs with emeralds, purple, and
broidered work, and fine linen, and coral, and agate.

27:17 Judah, and the land of Israel, they were thy merchants: they
traded in thy market wheat of Minnith, and Pannag, and honey, and oil,
and balm.

27:18 Damascus was thy merchant in the multitude of the wares of thy
making, for the multitude of all riches; in the wine of Helbon, and
white wool.

27:19 Dan also and Javan going to and fro occupied in thy fairs:
bright iron, cassia, and calamus, were in thy market.

27:20 Dedan was thy merchant in precious clothes for chariots.

27:21 Arabia, and all the princes of Kedar, they occupied with thee in
lambs, and rams, and goats: in these were they thy merchants.

27:22 The merchants of Sheba and Raamah, they were thy merchants: they
occupied in thy fairs with chief of all spices, and with all precious
stones, and gold.

27:23 Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, the merchants of Sheba, Asshur, and
Chilmad, were thy merchants.

27:24 These were thy merchants in all sorts of things, in blue
clothes, and broidered work, and in chests of rich apparel, bound with
cords, and made of cedar, among thy merchandise.

27:25 The ships of Tarshish did sing of thee in thy market: and thou
wast replenished, and made very glorious in the midst of the seas.

27:26 Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters: the east wind
hath broken thee in the midst of the seas.

27:27 Thy riches, and thy fairs, thy merchandise, thy mariners, and
thy pilots, thy calkers, and the occupiers of thy merchandise, and all
thy men of war, that are in thee, and in all thy company which is in
the midst of thee, shall fall into the midst of the seas in the day of
thy ruin.

27:28 The suburbs shall shake at the sound of the cry of thy pilots.

27:29 And all that handle the oar, the mariners, and all the pilots of
the sea, shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the
land; 27:30 And shall cause their voice to be heard against thee, and
shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads, they
shall wallow themselves in the ashes: 27:31 And they shall make
themselves utterly bald for thee, and gird them with sackcloth, and
they shall weep for thee with bitterness of heart and bitter wailing.

27:32 And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee,
and lament over thee, saying, What city is like Tyrus, like the
destroyed in the midst of the sea?  27:33 When thy wares went forth
out of the seas, thou filledst many people; thou didst enrich the
kings of the earth with the multitude of thy riches and of thy
merchandise.

27:34 In the time when thou shalt be broken by the seas in the depths
of the waters thy merchandise and all thy company in the midst of thee
shall fall.

27:35 All the inhabitants of the isles shall be astonished at thee,
and their kings shall be sore afraid, they shall be troubled in their
countenance.

27:36 The merchants among the people shall hiss at thee; thou shalt be
a terror, and never shalt be any more.

28:1 The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 28:2 Son of man,
say unto the prince of Tyrus, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thine
heart is lifted up, and thou hast said, I am a God, I sit in the seat
of God, in the midst of the seas; yet thou art a man, and not God,
though thou set thine heart as the heart of God: 28:3 Behold, thou art
wiser than Daniel; there is no secret that they can hide from thee:
28:4 With thy wisdom and with thine understanding thou hast gotten
thee riches, and hast gotten gold and silver into thy treasures: 28:5
By thy great wisdom and by thy traffick hast thou increased thy
riches, and thine heart is lifted up because of thy riches: 28:6
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast set thine heart
as the heart of God; 28:7 Behold, therefore I will bring strangers
upon thee, the terrible of the nations: and they shall draw their
swords against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall defile thy
brightness.

28:8 They shall bring thee down to the pit, and thou shalt die the
deaths of them that are slain in the midst of the seas.

28:9 Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee, I am God? but
thou shalt be a man, and no God, in the hand of him that slayeth thee.

28:10 Thou shalt die the deaths of the uncircumcised by the hand of
strangers: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD.

28:11 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 28:12 Son of
man, take up a lamentation upon the king of Tyrus, and say unto him,
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and
perfect in beauty.

28:13 Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone
was thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the
onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle,
and gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared
in thee in the day that thou wast created.

28:14 Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee
so: thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and
down in the midst of the stones of fire.

28:15 Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast
created, till iniquity was found in thee.

28:16 By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst
of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore I will cast
thee as profane out of the mountain of God: and I will destroy thee, O
covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.

28:17 Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou hast
corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness: I will cast thee to
the ground, I will lay thee before kings, that they may behold thee.

28:18 Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine
iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffick; therefore will I bring
forth a fire from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee, and I will
bring thee to ashes upon the earth in the sight of all them that
behold thee.

28:19 All they that know thee among the people shall be astonished at
thee: thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt thou be any more.

28:20 Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 28:21 Son of
man, set thy face against Zidon, and prophesy against it, 28:22 And
say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, O Zidon; and
I will be glorified in the midst of thee: and they shall know that I
am the LORD, when I shall have executed judgments in her, and shall be
sanctified in her.

28:23 For I will send into her pestilence, and blood into her streets;
and the wounded shall be judged in the midst of her by the sword upon
her on every side; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

28:24 And there shall be no more a pricking brier unto the house of
Israel, nor any grieving thorn of all that are round about them, that
despised them; and they shall know that I am the Lord GOD.

28:25 Thus saith the Lord GOD; When I shall have gathered the house of
Israel from the people among whom they are scattered, and shall be
sanctified in them in the sight of the heathen, then shall they dwell
in their land that I have given to my servant Jacob.

28:26 And they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses, and
plant vineyards; yea, they shall dwell with confidence, when I have
executed judgments upon all those that despise them round about them;
and they shall know that I am the LORD their God.

29:1 In the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the
month, the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 29:2 Son of man, set
thy face against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him, and
against all Egypt: 29:3 Speak, and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great dragon
that lieth in the midst of his rivers, which hath said, My river is
mine own, and I have made it for myself.

29:4 But I will put hooks in thy jaws, and I will cause the fish of
thy rivers to stick unto thy scales, and I will bring thee up out of
the midst of thy rivers, and all the fish of thy rivers shall stick
unto thy scales.

29:5 And I will leave thee thrown into the wilderness, thee and all
the fish of thy rivers: thou shalt fall upon the open fields; thou
shalt not be brought together, nor gathered: I have given thee for
meat to the beasts of the field and to the fowls of the heaven.

29:6 And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am the LORD,
because they have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel.

29:7 When they took hold of thee by thy hand, thou didst break, and
rend all their shoulder: and when they leaned upon thee, thou brakest,
and madest all their loins to be at a stand.

29:8 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will bring a sword
upon thee, and cut off man and beast out of thee.

29:9 And the land of Egypt shall be desolate and waste; and they shall
know that I am the LORD: because he hath said, The river is mine, and
I have made it.

29:10 Behold, therefore I am against thee, and against thy rivers, and
I will make the land of Egypt utterly waste and desolate, from the
tower of Syene even unto the border of Ethiopia.

29:11 No foot of man shall pass through it, nor foot of beast shall
pass through it, neither shall it be inhabited forty years.

29:12 And I will make the land of Egypt desolate in the midst of the
countries that are desolate, and her cities among the cities that are
laid waste shall be desolate forty years: and I will scatter the
Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them through the
countries.

29:13 Yet thus saith the Lord GOD; At the end of forty years will I
gather the Egyptians from the people whither they were scattered:
29:14 And I will bring again the captivity of Egypt, and will cause
them to return into the land of Pathros, into the land of their
habitation; and they shall be there a base kingdom.

29:15 It shall be the basest of the kingdoms; neither shall it exalt
itself any more above the nations: for I will diminish them, that they
shall no more rule over the nations.

29:16 And it shall be no more the confidence of the house of Israel,
which bringeth their iniquity to remembrance, when they shall look
after them: but they shall know that I am the Lord GOD.

29:17 And it came to pass in the seven and twentieth year, in the
first month, in the first day of the month, the word of the LORD came
unto me, saying, 29:18 Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon
caused his army to serve a great service against Tyrus: every head was
made bald, and every shoulder was peeled: yet had he no wages, nor his
army, for Tyrus, for the service that he had served against it: 29:19
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will give the land of
Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; and he shall take her
multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey; and it shall be the
wages for his army.

29:20 I have given him the land of Egypt for his labour wherewith he
served against it, because they wrought for me, saith the Lord GOD.

29:21 In that day will I cause the horn of the house of Israel to bud
forth, and I will give thee the opening of the mouth in the midst of
them; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

30:1 The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 30:2 Son of man,
prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Howl ye, Woe worth the day!
30:3 For the day is near, even the day of the LORD is near, a cloudy
day; it shall be the time of the heathen.

30:4 And the sword shall come upon Egypt, and great pain shall be in
Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt, and they shall take away
her multitude, and her foundations shall be broken down.

30:5 Ethiopia, and Libya, and Lydia, and all the mingled people, and
Chub, and the men of the land that is in league, shall fall with them
by the sword.

30:6 Thus saith the LORD; They also that uphold Egypt shall fall; and
the pride of her power shall come down: from the tower of Syene shall
they fall in it by the sword, saith the Lord GOD.

30:7 And they shall be desolate in the midst of the countries that are
desolate, and her cities shall be in the midst of the cities that are
wasted.

30:8 And they shall know that I am the LORD, when I have set a fire in
Egypt, and when all her helpers shall be destroyed.

30:9 In that day shall messengers go forth from me in ships to make
the careless Ethiopians afraid, and great pain shall come upon them,
as in the day of Egypt: for, lo, it cometh.

30:10 Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will also make the multitude of Egypt
to cease by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon.

30:11 He and his people with him, the terrible of the nations, shall
be brought to destroy the land: and they shall draw their swords
against Egypt, and fill the land with the slain.

30:12 And I will make the rivers dry, and sell the land into the hand
of the wicked: and I will make the land waste, and all that is
therein, by the hand of strangers: I the LORD have spoken it.

30:13 Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will also destroy the idols, and I
will cause their images to cease out of Noph; and there shall be no
more a prince of the land of Egypt: and I will put a fear in the land
of Egypt.

30:14 And I will make Pathros desolate, and will set fire in Zoan, and
will execute judgments in No.

30:15 And I will pour my fury upon Sin, the strength of Egypt; and I
will cut off the multitude of No.

30:16 And I will set fire in Egypt: Sin shall have great pain, and No
shall be rent asunder, and Noph shall have distresses daily.

30:17 The young men of Aven and of Pibeseth shall fall by the sword:
and these cities shall go into captivity.

30:18 At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be darkened, when I shall
break there the yokes of Egypt: and the pomp of her strength shall
cease in her: as for her, a cloud shall cover her, and her daughters
shall go into captivity.

30:19 Thus will I execute judgments in Egypt: and they shall know that
I am the LORD.

30:20 And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first month, in
the seventh day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me,
saying, 30:21 Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of
Egypt; and, lo, it shall not be bound up to be healed, to put a roller
to bind it, to make it strong to hold the sword.

30:22 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against Pharaoh
king of Egypt, and will break his arms, the strong, and that which was
broken; and I will cause the sword to fall out of his hand.

30:23 And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will
disperse them through the countries.

30:24 And I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and put
my sword in his hand: but I will break Pharaoh's arms, and he shall
groan before him with the groanings of a deadly wounded man.

30:25 But I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and the
arms of Pharaoh shall fall down; and they shall know that I am the
LORD, when I shall put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon,
and he shall stretch it out upon the land of Egypt.

30:26 And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and disperse
them among the countries; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

31:1 And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the third month, in
the first day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me,
saying, 31:2 Son of man, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, and to his
multitude; Whom art thou like in thy greatness?  31:3 Behold, the
Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and with a
shadowing shroud, and of an high stature; and his top was among the
thick boughs.

31:4 The waters made him great, the deep set him up on high with her
rivers running round about his plants, and sent her little rivers unto
all the trees of the field.

31:5 Therefore his height was exalted above all the trees of the
field, and his boughs were multiplied, and his branches became long
because of the multitude of waters, when he shot forth.

31:6 All the fowls of heaven made their nests in his boughs, and under
his branches did all the beasts of the field bring forth their young,
and under his shadow dwelt all great nations.

31:7 Thus was he fair in his greatness, in the length of his branches:
for his root was by great waters.

31:8 The cedars in the garden of God could not hide him: the fir trees
were not like his boughs, and the chestnut trees were not like his
branches; nor any tree in the garden of God was like unto him in his
beauty.

31:9 I have made him fair by the multitude of his branches: so that
all the trees of Eden, that were in the garden of God, envied him.

31:10 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast lifted up
thyself in height, and he hath shot up his top among the thick boughs,
and his heart is lifted up in his height; 31:11 I have therefore
delivered him into the hand of the mighty one of the heathen; he shall
surely deal with him: I have driven him out for his wickedness.

31:12 And strangers, the terrible of the nations, have cut him off,
and have left him: upon the mountains and in all the valleys his
branches are fallen, and his boughs are broken by all the rivers of
the land; and all the people of the earth are gone down from his
shadow, and have left him.

31:13 Upon his ruin shall all the fowls of the heaven remain, and all
the beasts of the field shall be upon his branches: 31:14 To the end
that none of all the trees by the waters exalt themselves for their
height, neither shoot up their top among the thick boughs, neither
their trees stand up in their height, all that drink water: for they
are all delivered unto death, to the nether parts of the earth, in the
midst of the children of men, with them that go down to the pit.

31:15 Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day when he went down to the
grave I caused a mourning: I covered the deep for him, and I
restrained the floods thereof, and the great waters were stayed: and I
caused Lebanon to mourn for him, and all the trees of the field
fainted for him.

31:16 I made the nations to shake at the sound of his fall, when I
cast him down to hell with them that descend into the pit: and all the
trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, all that drink water,
shall be comforted in the nether parts of the earth.

31:17 They also went down into hell with him unto them that be slain
with the sword; and they that were his arm, that dwelt under his
shadow in the midst of the heathen.

31:18 To whom art thou thus like in glory and in greatness among the
trees of Eden? yet shalt thou be brought down with the trees of Eden
unto the nether parts of the earth: thou shalt lie in the midst of the
uncircumcised with them that be slain by the sword. This is Pharaoh
and all his multitude, saith the Lord GOD.

32:1 And it came to pass in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, in
the first day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me,
saying, 32:2 Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh king of
Egypt, and say unto him, Thou art like a young lion of the nations,
and thou art as a whale in the seas: and thou camest forth with thy
rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy feet, and fouledst their
rivers.

32:3 Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will therefore spread out my net over
thee with a company of many people; and they shall bring thee up in my
net.

32:4 Then will I leave thee upon the land, I will cast thee forth upon
the open field, and will cause all the fowls of the heaven to remain
upon thee, and I will fill the beasts of the whole earth with thee.

32:5 And I will lay thy flesh upon the mountains, and fill the valleys
with thy height.

32:6 I will also water with thy blood the land wherein thou swimmest,
even to the mountains; and the rivers shall be full of thee.

32:7 And when I shall put thee out, I will cover the heaven, and make
the stars thereof dark; I will cover the sun with a cloud, and the
moon shall not give her light.

32:8 All the bright lights of heaven will I make dark over thee, and
set darkness upon thy land, saith the Lord GOD.

32:9 I will also vex the hearts of many people, when I shall bring thy
destruction among the nations, into the countries which thou hast not
known.

32:10 Yea, I will make many people amazed at thee, and their kings
shall be horribly afraid for thee, when I shall brandish my sword
before them; and they shall tremble at every moment, every man for his
own life, in the day of thy fall.

32:11 For thus saith the Lord GOD; The sword of the king of Babylon
shall come upon thee.

32:12 By the swords of the mighty will I cause thy multitude to fall,
the terrible of the nations, all of them: and they shall spoil the
pomp of Egypt, and all the multitude thereof shall be destroyed.

32:13 I will destroy also all the beasts thereof from beside the great
waters; neither shall the foot of man trouble them any more, nor the
hoofs of beasts trouble them.

32:14 Then will I make their waters deep, and cause their rivers to
run like oil, saith the Lord GOD.

32:15 When I shall make the land of Egypt desolate, and the country
shall be destitute of that whereof it was full, when I shall smite all
them that dwell therein, then shall they know that I am the LORD.

32:16 This is the lamentation wherewith they shall lament her: the
daughters of the nations shall lament her: they shall lament for her,
even for Egypt, and for all her multitude, saith the Lord GOD.

32:17 It came to pass also in the twelfth year, in the fifteenth day
of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 32:18
Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt, and cast them down, even
her, and the daughters of the famous nations, unto the nether parts of
the earth, with them that go down into the pit.

32:19 Whom dost thou pass in beauty? go down, and be thou laid with
the uncircumcised.

32:20 They shall fall in the midst of them that are slain by the
sword: she is delivered to the sword: draw her and all her multitudes.

32:21 The strong among the mighty shall speak to him out of the midst
of hell with them that help him: they are gone down, they lie
uncircumcised, slain by the sword.

32:22 Asshur is there and all her company: his graves are about him:
all of them slain, fallen by the sword: 32:23 Whose graves are set in
the sides of the pit, and her company is round about her grave: all of
them slain, fallen by the sword, which caused terror in the land of
the living.

32:24 There is Elam and all her multitude round about her grave, all
of them slain, fallen by the sword, which are gone down uncircumcised
into the nether parts of the earth, which caused their terror in the
land of the living; yet have they borne their shame with them that go
down to the pit.

32:25 They have set her a bed in the midst of the slain with all her
multitude: her graves are round about him: all of them uncircumcised,
slain by the sword: though their terror was caused in the land of the
living, yet have they borne their shame with them that go down to the
pit: he is put in the midst of them that be slain.

32:26 There is Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude: her graves are
round about him: all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, though
they caused their terror in the land of the living.

32:27 And they shall not lie with the mighty that are fallen of the
uncircumcised, which are gone down to hell with their weapons of war:
and they have laid their swords under their heads, but their
iniquities shall be upon their bones, though they were the terror of
the mighty in the land of the living.

32:28 Yea, thou shalt be broken in the midst of the uncircumcised, and
shalt lie with them that are slain with the sword.

32:29 There is Edom, her kings, and all her princes, which with their
might are laid by them that were slain by the sword: they shall lie
with the uncircumcised, and with them that go down to the pit.

32:30 There be the princes of the north, all of them, and all the
Zidonians, which are gone down with the slain; with their terror they
are ashamed of their might; and they lie uncircumcised with them that
be slain by the sword, and bear their shame with them that go down to
the pit.

32:31 Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be comforted over all his
multitude, even Pharaoh and all his army slain by the sword, saith the
Lord GOD.

32:32 For I have caused my terror in the land of the living: and he
shall be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised with them that are
slain with the sword, even Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the
Lord GOD.

33:1 Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 33:2 Son of man,
speak to the children of thy people, and say unto them, When I bring
the sword upon a land, if the people of the land take a man of their
coasts, and set him for their watchman: 33:3 If when he seeth the
sword come upon the land, he blow the trumpet, and warn the people;
33:4 Then whosoever heareth the sound of the trumpet, and taketh not
warning; if the sword come, and take him away, his blood shall be upon
his own head.

33:5 He heard the sound of the trumpet, and took not warning; his
blood shall be upon him. But he that taketh warning shall deliver his
soul.

33:6 But if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the trumpet,
and the people be not warned; if the sword come, and take any person
from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity; but his blood will
I require at the watchman's hand.

33:7 So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house
of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn
them from me.

33:8 When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt surely die;
if thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked
man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine
hand.

33:9 Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it;
if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou
hast delivered thy soul.

33:10 Therefore, O thou son of man, speak unto the house of Israel;
Thus ye speak, saying, If our transgressions and our sins be upon us,
and we pine away in them, how should we then live?  33:11 Say unto
them, As I live, saith the Lord GOD, I have no pleasure in the death
of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn
ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of
Israel?  33:12 Therefore, thou son of man, say unto the children of
thy people, The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him
in the day of his transgression: as for the wickedness of the wicked,
he shall not fall thereby in the day that he turneth from his
wickedness; neither shall the righteous be able to live for his
righteousness in the day that he sinneth.

33:13 When I shall say to the righteous, that he shall surely live; if
he trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his
righteousnesses shall not be remembered; but for his iniquity that he
hath committed, he shall die for it.

33:14 Again, when I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; if he
turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right; 33:15 If the
wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the
statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live,
he shall not die.

33:16 None of his sins that he hath committed shall be mentioned unto
him: he hath done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely
live.

33:17 Yet the children of thy people say, The way of the Lord is not
equal: but as for them, their way is not equal.

33:18 When the righteous turneth from his righteousness, and
committeth iniquity, he shall even die thereby.

33:19 But if the wicked turn from his wickedness, and do that which is
lawful and right, he shall live thereby.

33:20 Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equal. O ye house of
Israel, I will judge you every one after his ways.

33:21 And it came to pass in the twelfth year of our captivity, in the
tenth month, in the fifth day of the month, that one that had escaped
out of Jerusalem came unto me, saying, The city is smitten.

33:22 Now the hand of the LORD was upon me in the evening, afore he
that was escaped came; and had opened my mouth, until he came to me in
the morning; and my mouth was opened, and I was no more dumb.

33:23 Then the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 33:24 Son of
man, they that inhabit those wastes of the land of Israel speak,
saying, Abraham was one, and he inherited the land: but we are many;
the land is given us for inheritance.

33:25 Wherefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Ye eat with
the blood, and lift up your eyes toward your idols, and shed blood:
and shall ye possess the land?  33:26 Ye stand upon your sword, ye
work abomination, and ye defile every one his neighbour's wife: and
shall ye possess the land?  33:27 Say thou thus unto them, Thus saith
the Lord GOD; As I live, surely they that are in the wastes shall fall
by the sword, and him that is in the open field will I give to the
beasts to be devoured, and they that be in the forts and in the caves
shall die of the pestilence.

33:28 For I will lay the land most desolate, and the pomp of her
strength shall cease; and the mountains of Israel shall be desolate,
that none shall pass through.

33:29 Then shall they know that I am the LORD, when I have laid the
land most desolate because of all their abominations which they have
committed.

33:30 Also, thou son of man, the children of thy people still are
talking against thee by the walls and in the doors of the houses, and
speak one to another, every one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray
you, and hear what is the word that cometh forth from the LORD.

33:31 And they come unto thee as the people cometh, and they sit
before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not
do them: for with their mouth they shew much love, but their heart
goeth after their covetousness.

33:32 And, lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that
hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument: for they
hear thy words, but they do them not.

33:33 And when this cometh to pass, (lo, it will come,) then shall
they know that a prophet hath been among them.

34:1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 34:2 Son of man,
prophesy against the shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and say unto them,
Thus saith the Lord GOD unto the shepherds; Woe be to the shepherds of
Israel that do feed themselves! should not the shepherds feed the
flocks?  34:3 Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool, ye kill
them that are fed: but ye feed not the flock.

34:4 The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed
that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken,
neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have
ye sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye
ruled them.

34:5 And they were scattered, because there is no shepherd: and they
became meat to all the beasts of the field, when they were scattered.

34:6 My sheep wandered through all the mountains, and upon every high
hill: yea, my flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth, and
none did search or seek after them.

34:7 Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of the LORD; 34:8 As I
live, saith the Lord GOD, surely because my flock became a prey, and
my flock became meat to every beast of the field, because there was no
shepherd, neither did my shepherds search for my flock, but the
shepherds fed themselves, and fed not my flock; 34:9 Therefore, O ye
shepherds, hear the word of the LORD; 34:10 Thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I am against the shepherds; and I will require my flock at
their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock; neither
shall the shepherds feed themselves any more; for I will deliver my
flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them.

34:11 For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I, even I, will both search
my sheep, and seek them out.

34:12 As a shepherd seeketh out his flock in the day that he is among
his sheep that are scattered; so will I seek out my sheep, and will
deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the
cloudy and dark day.

34:13 And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from
the countries, and will bring them to their own land, and feed them
upon the mountains of Israel by the rivers, and in all the inhabited
places of the country.

34:14 I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains
of Israel shall their fold be: there shall they lie in a good fold,
and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the mountains of Israel.

34:15 I will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, saith
the Lord GOD.

34:16 I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was
driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will
strengthen that which was sick: but I will destroy the fat and the
strong; I will feed them with judgment.

34:17 And as for you, O my flock, thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I
judge between cattle and cattle, between the rams and the he goats.

34:18 Seemeth it a small thing unto you to have eaten up the good
pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your
pastures? and to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must foul the
residue with your feet?  34:19 And as for my flock, they eat that
which ye have trodden with your feet; and they drink that which ye
have fouled with your feet.

34:20 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD unto them; Behold, I, even I,
will judge between the fat cattle and between the lean cattle.

34:21 Because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pushed
all the diseased with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad;
34:22 Therefore will I save my flock, and they shall no more be a
prey; and I will judge between cattle and cattle.

34:23 And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed
them, even my servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their
shepherd.

34:24 And I the LORD will be their God, and my servant David a prince
among them; I the LORD have spoken it.

34:25 And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause
the evil beasts to cease out of the land: and they shall dwell safely
in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.

34:26 And I will make them and the places round about my hill a
blessing; and I will cause the shower to come down in his season;
there shall be showers of blessing.

34:27 And the tree of the field shall yield her fruit, and the earth
shall yield her increase, and they shall be safe in their land, and
shall know that I am the LORD, when I have broken the bands of their
yoke, and delivered them out of the hand of those that served
themselves of them.

34:28 And they shall no more be a prey to the heathen, neither shall
the beast of the land devour them; but they shall dwell safely, and
none shall make them afraid.

