34:29 And I will raise up for them a plant of renown, and they shall
be no more consumed with hunger in the land, neither bear the shame of
the heathen any more.

34:30 Thus shall they know that I the LORD their God am with them, and
that they, even the house of Israel, are my people, saith the Lord
GOD.

34:31 And ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and I am your
God, saith the Lord GOD.

35:1 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 35:2 Son of
man, set thy face against mount Seir, and prophesy against it, 35:3
And say unto it, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, O mount Seir, I am
against thee, and I will stretch out mine hand against thee, and I
will make thee most desolate.

35:4 I will lay thy cities waste, and thou shalt be desolate, and thou
shalt know that I am the LORD.

35:5 Because thou hast had a perpetual hatred, and hast shed the blood
of the children of Israel by the force of the sword in the time of
their calamity, in the time that their iniquity had an end: 35:6
Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will prepare thee unto
blood, and blood shall pursue thee: sith thou hast not hated blood,
even blood shall pursue thee.

35:7 Thus will I make mount Seir most desolate, and cut off from it
him that passeth out and him that returneth.

35:8 And I will fill his mountains with his slain men: in thy hills,
and in thy valleys, and in all thy rivers, shall they fall that are
slain with the sword.

35:9 I will make thee perpetual desolations, and thy cities shall not
return: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

35:10 Because thou hast said, These two nations and these two
countries shall be mine, and we will possess it; whereas the LORD was
there: 35:11 Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will even do
according to thine anger, and according to thine envy which thou hast
used out of thy hatred against them; and I will make myself known
among them, when I have judged thee.

35:12 And thou shalt know that I am the LORD, and that I have heard
all thy blasphemies which thou hast spoken against the mountains of
Israel, saying, They are laid desolate, they are given us to consume.

35:13 Thus with your mouth ye have boasted against me, and have
multiplied your words against me: I have heard them.

35:14 Thus saith the Lord GOD; When the whole earth rejoiceth, I will
make thee desolate.

35:15 As thou didst rejoice at the inheritance of the house of Israel,
because it was desolate, so will I do unto thee: thou shalt be
desolate, O mount Seir, and all Idumea, even all of it: and they shall
know that I am the LORD.

36:1 Also, thou son of man, prophesy unto the mountains of Israel, and
say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the LORD: 36:2 Thus
saith the Lord GOD; Because the enemy hath said against you, Aha, even
the ancient high places are ours in possession: 36:3 Therefore
prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because they have made you
desolate, and swallowed you up on every side, that ye might be a
possession unto the residue of the heathen, and ye are taken up in the
lips of talkers, and are an infamy of the people: 36:4 Therefore, ye
mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD; Thus saith the
Lord GOD to the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the
valleys, to the desolate wastes, and to the cities that are forsaken,
which became a prey and derision to the residue of the heathen that
are round about; 36:5 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Surely in the
fire of my jealousy have I spoken against the residue of the heathen,
and against all Idumea, which have appointed my land into their
possession with the joy of all their heart, with despiteful minds, to
cast it out for a prey.

36:6 Prophesy therefore concerning the land of Israel, and say unto
the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys,
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I have spoken in my jealousy and in
my fury, because ye have borne the shame of the heathen: 36:7
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I have lifted up mine hand, Surely
the heathen that are about you, they shall bear their shame.

36:8 But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your
branches, and yield your fruit to my people of Israel; for they are at
hand to come.

36:9 For, behold, I am for you, and I will turn unto you, and ye shall
be tilled and sown: 36:10 And I will multiply men upon you, all the
house of Israel, even all of it: and the cities shall be inhabited,
and the wastes shall be builded: 36:11 And I will multiply upon you
man and beast; and they shall increase and bring fruit: and I will
settle you after your old estates, and will do better unto you than at
your beginnings: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

36:12 Yea, I will cause men to walk upon you, even my people Israel;
and they shall possess thee, and thou shalt be their inheritance, and
thou shalt no more henceforth bereave them of men.

36:13 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because they say unto you, Thou land
devourest up men, and hast bereaved thy nations: 36:14 Therefore thou
shalt devour men no more, neither bereave thy nations any more, saith
the Lord GOD.

36:15 Neither will I cause men to hear in thee the shame of the
heathen any more, neither shalt thou bear the reproach of the people
any more, neither shalt thou cause thy nations to fall any more, saith
the Lord GOD.

36:16 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 36:17 Son of
man, when the house of Israel dwelt in their own land, they defiled it
by their own way and by their doings: their way was before me as the
uncleanness of a removed woman.

36:18 Wherefore I poured my fury upon them for the blood that they had
shed upon the land, and for their idols wherewith they had polluted
it: 36:19 And I scattered them among the heathen, and they were
dispersed through the countries: according to their way and according
to their doings I judged them.

36:20 And when they entered unto the heathen, whither they went, they
profaned my holy name, when they said to them, These are the people of
the LORD, and are gone forth out of his land.

36:21 But I had pity for mine holy name, which the house of Israel had
profaned among the heathen, whither they went.

36:22 Therefore say unto the house of Israel, thus saith the Lord GOD;
I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy
name's sake, which ye have profaned among the heathen, whither ye
went.

36:23 And I will sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the
heathen, which ye have profaned in the midst of them; and the heathen
shall know that I am the LORD, saith the Lord GOD, when I shall be
sanctified in you before their eyes.

36:24 For I will take you from among the heathen, and gather you out
of all countries, and will bring you into your own land.

36:25 Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be
clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I
cleanse you.

36:26 A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh,
and I will give you an heart of flesh.

36:27 And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

36:28 And ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers; and
ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.

36:29 I will also save you from all your uncleannesses: and I will
call for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon you.

36:30 And I will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of
the field, that ye shall receive no more reproach of famine among the
heathen.

36:31 Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that
were not good, and shall lothe yourselves in your own sight for your
iniquities and for your abominations.

36:32 Not for your sakes do I this, saith the Lord GOD, be it known
unto you: be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of
Israel.

36:33 Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day that I shall have cleansed
you from all your iniquities I will also cause you to dwell in the
cities, and the wastes shall be builded.

36:34 And the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate
in the sight of all that passed by.

36:35 And they shall say, This land that was desolate is become like
the garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate and ruined cities are
become fenced, and are inhabited.

36:36 Then the heathen that are left round about you shall know that I
the LORD build the ruined places, and plant that that was desolate: I
the LORD have spoken it, and I will do it.

36:37 Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will yet for this be enquired of by
the house of Israel, to do it for them; I will increase them with men
like a flock.

36:38 As the holy flock, as the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn
feasts; so shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of men: and
they shall know that I am the LORD.

37:1 The hand of the LORD was upon me, and carried me out in the
spirit of the LORD, and set me down in the midst of the valley which
was full of bones, 37:2 And caused me to pass by them round about:
and, behold, there were very many in the open valley; and, lo, they
were very dry.

37:3 And he said unto me, Son of man, can these bones live? And I
answered, O Lord GOD, thou knowest.

37:4 Again he said unto me, Prophesy upon these bones, and say unto
them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the LORD.

37:5 Thus saith the Lord GOD unto these bones; Behold, I will cause
breath to enter into you, and ye shall live: 37:6 And I will lay
sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with
skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know that
I am the LORD.

37:7 So I prophesied as I was commanded: and as I prophesied, there
was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came together, bone
to his bone.

37:8 And when I beheld, lo, the sinews and the flesh came up upon
them, and the skin covered them above: but there was no breath in
them.

37:9 Then said he unto me, Prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of
man, and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Come from the four
winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live.

37:10 So I prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into
them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great
army.

37:11 Then he said unto me, Son of man, these bones are the whole
house of Israel: behold, they say, Our bones are dried, and our hope
is lost: we are cut off for our parts.

37:12 Therefore prophesy and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up
out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel.

37:13 And ye shall know that I am the LORD, when I have opened your
graves, O my people, and brought you up out of your graves, 37:14 And
shall put my spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I shall place you
in your own land: then shall ye know that I the LORD have spoken it,
and performed it, saith the LORD.

37:15 The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 37:16 Moreover,
thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah,
and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another
stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim and for all
the house of Israel his companions: 37:17 And join them one to another
into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand.

37:18 And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee,
saying, Wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these?  37:19 Say
unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will take the stick of
Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his
fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and
make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand.

37:20 And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand
before their eyes.

37:21 And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will take
the children of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone,
and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own
land: 37:22 And I will make them one nation in the land upon the
mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they
shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two
kingdoms any more at all.

37:23 Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols,
nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their
transgressions: but I will save them out of all their dwellingplaces,
wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them: so shall they be my
people, and I will be their God.

37:24 And David my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall
have one shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe
my statutes, and do them.

37:25 And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my
servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell
therein, even they, and their children, and their children's children
for ever: and my servant David shall be their prince for ever.

37:26 Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be
an everlasting covenant with them: and I will place them, and multiply
them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.

37:27 My tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, I will be their God,
and they shall be my people.

37:28 And the heathen shall know that I the LORD do sanctify Israel,
when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore.

38:1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 38:2 Son of man,
set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog, the chief prince of
Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy against him, 38:3 And say, Thus saith
the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, the chief prince of
Meshech and Tubal: 38:4 And I will turn thee back, and put hooks into
thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and all thine army, horses and
horsemen, all of them clothed with all sorts of armour, even a great
company with bucklers and shields, all of them handling swords: 38:5
Persia, Ethiopia, and Libya with them; all of them with shield and
helmet: 38:6 Gomer, and all his bands; the house of Togarmah of the
north quarters, and all his bands: and many people with thee.

38:7 Be thou prepared, and prepare for thyself, thou, and all thy
company that are assembled unto thee, and be thou a guard unto them.

38:8 After many days thou shalt be visited: in the latter years thou
shalt come into the land that is brought back from the sword, and is
gathered out of many people, against the mountains of Israel, which
have been always waste: but it is brought forth out of the nations,
and they shall dwell safely all of them.

38:9 Thou shalt ascend and come like a storm, thou shalt be like a
cloud to cover the land, thou, and all thy bands, and many people with
thee.

38:10 Thus saith the Lord GOD; It shall also come to pass, that at the
same time shall things come into thy mind, and thou shalt think an
evil thought: 38:11 And thou shalt say, I will go up to the land of
unwalled villages; I will go to them that are at rest, that dwell
safely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither bars
nor gates, 38:12 To take a spoil, and to take a prey; to turn thine
hand upon the desolate places that are now inhabited, and upon the
people that are gathered out of the nations, which have gotten cattle
and goods, that dwell in the midst of the land.

38:13 Sheba, and Dedan, and the merchants of Tarshish, with all the
young lions thereof, shall say unto thee, Art thou come to take a
spoil? hast thou gathered thy company to take a prey? to carry away
silver and gold, to take away cattle and goods, to take a great spoil?
38:14 Therefore, son of man, prophesy and say unto Gog, Thus saith the
Lord GOD; In that day when my people of Israel dwelleth safely, shalt
thou not know it?  38:15 And thou shalt come from thy place out of the
north parts, thou, and many people with thee, all of them riding upon
horses, a great company, and a mighty army: 38:16 And thou shalt come
up against my people of Israel, as a cloud to cover the land; it shall
be in the latter days, and I will bring thee against my land, that the
heathen may know me, when I shall be sanctified in thee, O Gog, before
their eyes.

38:17 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Art thou he of whom I have spoken in
old time by my servants the prophets of Israel, which prophesied in
those days many years that I would bring thee against them?  38:18 And
it shall come to pass at the same time when Gog shall come against the
land of Israel, saith the Lord GOD, that my fury shall come up in my
face.

38:19 For in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken,
Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of
Israel; 38:20 So that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the
heaven, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things that
creep upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the face of the
earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown
down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to
the ground.

38:21 And I will call for a sword against him throughout all my
mountains, saith the Lord GOD: every man's sword shall be against his
brother.

38:22 And I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and
I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people
that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire,
and brimstone.

38:23 Thus will I magnify myself, and sanctify myself; and I will be
known in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that I am the
LORD.

39:1 Therefore, thou son of man, prophesy against Gog, and say, Thus
saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, the chief prince
of Meshech and Tubal: 39:2 And I will turn thee back, and leave but
the sixth part of thee, and will cause thee to come up from the north
parts, and will bring thee upon the mountains of Israel: 39:3 And I
will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and will cause thine arrows
to fall out of thy right hand.

39:4 Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou, and all thy
bands, and the people that is with thee: I will give thee unto the
ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts of the field to be
devoured.

39:5 Thou shalt fall upon the open field: for I have spoken it, saith
the Lord GOD.

39:6 And I will send a fire on Magog, and among them that dwell
carelessly in the isles: and they shall know that I am the LORD.

39:7 So will I make my holy name known in the midst of my people
Israel; and I will not let them pollute my holy name any more: and the
heathen shall know that I am the LORD, the Holy One in Israel.

39:8 Behold, it is come, and it is done, saith the Lord GOD; this is
the day whereof I have spoken.

39:9 And they that dwell in the cities of Israel shall go forth, and
shall set on fire and burn the weapons, both the shields and the
bucklers, the bows and the arrows, and the handstaves, and the spears,
and they shall burn them with fire seven years: 39:10 So that they
shall take no wood out of the field, neither cut down any out of the
forests; for they shall burn the weapons with fire: and they shall
spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, saith
the Lord GOD.

39:11 And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will give unto Gog
a place there of graves in Israel, the valley of the passengers on the
east of the sea: and it shall stop the noses of the passengers: and
there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude: and they shall call
it The valley of Hamongog.

39:12 And seven months shall the house of Israel be burying of them,
that they may cleanse the land.

39:13 Yea, all the people of the land shall bury them; and it shall be
to them a renown the day that I shall be glorified, saith the Lord
GOD.

39:14 And they shall sever out men of continual employment, passing
through the land to bury with the passengers those that remain upon
the face of the earth, to cleanse it: after the end of seven months
shall they search.

39:15 And the passengers that pass through the land, when any seeth a
man's bone, then shall he set up a sign by it, till the buriers have
buried it in the valley of Hamongog.

39:16 And also the name of the city shall be Hamonah. Thus shall they
cleanse the land.

39:17 And, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD; Speak unto every
feathered fowl, and to every beast of the field, Assemble yourselves,
and come; gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I do
sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of
Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood.

39:18 Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the
princes of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and of goats, of bullocks,
all of them fatlings of Bashan.

39:19 And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be
drunken, of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you.

39:20 Thus ye shall be filled at my table with horses and chariots,
with mighty men, and with all men of war, saith the Lord GOD.

39:21 And I will set my glory among the heathen, and all the heathen
shall see my judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have
laid upon them.

39:22 So the house of Israel shall know that I am the LORD their God
from that day and forward.

39:23 And the heathen shall know that the house of Israel went into
captivity for their iniquity: because they trespassed against me,
therefore hid I my face from them, and gave them into the hand of
their enemies: so fell they all by the sword.

39:24 According to their uncleanness and according to their
transgressions have I done unto them, and hid my face from them.

39:25 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Now will I bring again the
captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house of Israel, and
will be jealous for my holy name; 39:26 After that they have borne
their shame, and all their trespasses whereby they have trespassed
against me, when they dwelt safely in their land, and none made them
afraid.

39:27 When I have brought them again from the people, and gathered
them out of their enemies' lands, and am sanctified in them in the
sight of many nations; 39:28 Then shall they know that I am the LORD
their God, which caused them to be led into captivity among the
heathen: but I have gathered them unto their own land, and have left
none of them any more there.

39:29 Neither will I hide my face any more from them: for I have
poured out my spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord GOD.

40:1 In the five and twentieth year of our captivity, in the beginning
of the year, in the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year
after that the city was smitten, in the selfsame day the hand of the
LORD was upon me, and brought me thither.

40:2 In the visions of God brought he me into the land of Israel, and
set me upon a very high mountain, by which was as the frame of a city
on the south.

40:3 And he brought me thither, and, behold, there was a man, whose
appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in
his hand, and a measuring reed; and he stood in the gate.

40:4 And the man said unto me, Son of man, behold with thine eyes, and
hear with thine ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall shew
thee; for to the intent that I might shew them unto thee art thou
brought hither: declare all that thou seest to the house of Israel.

40:5 And behold a wall on the outside of the house round about, and in
the man's hand a measuring reed of six cubits long by the cubit and an
hand breadth: so he measured the breadth of the building, one reed;
and the height, one reed.

40:6 Then came he unto the gate which looketh toward the east, and
went up the stairs thereof, and measured the threshold of the gate,
which was one reed broad; and the other threshold of the gate, which
was one reed broad.

40:7 And every little chamber was one reed long, and one reed broad;
and between the little chambers were five cubits; and the threshold of
the gate by the porch of the gate within was one reed.

40:8 He measured also the porch of the gate within, one reed.

40:9 Then measured he the porch of the gate, eight cubits; and the
posts thereof, two cubits; and the porch of the gate was inward.

40:10 And the little chambers of the gate eastward were three on this
side, and three on that side; they three were of one measure: and the
posts had one measure on this side and on that side.

40:11 And he measured the breadth of the entry of the gate, ten
cubits; and the length of the gate, thirteen cubits.

40:12 The space also before the little chambers was one cubit on this
side, and the space was one cubit on that side: and the little
chambers were six cubits on this side, and six cubits on that side.

40:13 He measured then the gate from the roof of one little chamber to
the roof of another: the breadth was five and twenty cubits, door
against door.

40:14 He made also posts of threescore cubits, even unto the post of
the court round about the gate.

40:15 And from the face of the gate of the entrance unto the face of
the porch of the inner gate were fifty cubits.

40:16 And there were narrow windows to the little chambers, and to
their posts within the gate round about, and likewise to the arches:
and windows were round about inward: and upon each post were palm
trees.

40:17 Then brought he me into the outward court, and, lo, there were
chambers, and a pavement made for the court round about: thirty
chambers were upon the pavement.

40:18 And the pavement by the side of the gates over against the
length of the gates was the lower pavement.

40:19 Then he measured the breadth from the forefront of the lower
gate unto the forefront of the inner court without, an hundred cubits
eastward and northward.

40:20 And the gate of the outward court that looked toward the north,
he measured the length thereof, and the breadth thereof.

40:21 And the little chambers thereof were three on this side and
three on that side; and the posts thereof and the arches thereof were
after the measure of the first gate: the length thereof was fifty
cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.

40:22 And their windows, and their arches, and their palm trees, were
after the measure of the gate that looketh toward the east; and they
went up unto it by seven steps; and the arches thereof were before
them.

40:23 And the gate of the inner court was over against the gate toward
the north, and toward the east; and he measured from gate to gate an
hundred cubits.

40:24 After that he brought me toward the south, and behold a gate
toward the south: and he measured the posts thereof and the arches
thereof according to these measures.

40:25 And there were windows in it and in the arches thereof round
about, like those windows: the length was fifty cubits, and the
breadth five and twenty cubits.

40:26 And there were seven steps to go up to it, and the arches
thereof were before them: and it had palm trees, one on this side, and
another on that side, upon the posts thereof.

40:27 And there was a gate in the inner court toward the south: and he
measured from gate to gate toward the south an hundred cubits.

40:28 And he brought me to the inner court by the south gate: and he
measured the south gate according to these measures; 40:29 And the
little chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the arches
thereof, according to these measures: and there were windows in it and
in the arches thereof round about: it was fifty cubits long, and five
and twenty cubits broad.

40:30 And the arches round about were five and twenty cubits long, and
five cubits broad.

40:31 And the arches thereof were toward the utter court; and palm
trees were upon the posts thereof: and the going up to it had eight
steps.

40:32 And he brought me into the inner court toward the east: and he
measured the gate according to these measures.

40:33 And the little chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the
arches thereof, were according to these measures: and there were
windows therein and in the arches thereof round about: it was fifty
cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad.

40:34 And the arches thereof were toward the outward court; and palm
trees were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and
the going up to it had eight steps.

40:35 And he brought me to the north gate, and measured it according
to these measures; 40:36 The little chambers thereof, the posts
thereof, and the arches thereof, and the windows to it round about:
the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.

40:37 And the posts thereof were toward the utter court; and palm
trees were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and
the going up to it had eight steps.

40:38 And the chambers and the entries thereof were by the posts of
the gates, where they washed the burnt offering.

40:39 And in the porch of the gate were two tables on this side, and
two tables on that side, to slay thereon the burnt offering and the
sin offering and the trespass offering.

40:40 And at the side without, as one goeth up to the entry of the
north gate, were two tables; and on the other side, which was at the
porch of the gate, were two tables.

40:41 Four tables were on this side, and four tables on that side, by
the side of the gate; eight tables, whereupon they slew their
sacrifices.

40:42 And the four tables were of hewn stone for the burnt offering,
of a cubit and an half long, and a cubit and an half broad, and one
cubit high: whereupon also they laid the instruments wherewith they
slew the burnt offering and the sacrifice.

40:43 And within were hooks, an hand broad, fastened round about: and
upon the tables was the flesh of the offering.

40:44 And without the inner gate were the chambers of the singers in
the inner court, which was at the side of the north gate; and their
prospect was toward the south: one at the side of the east gate having
the prospect toward the north.

40:45 And he said unto me, This chamber, whose prospect is toward the
south, is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the house.

40:46 And the chamber whose prospect is toward the north is for the
priests, the keepers of the charge of the altar: these are the sons of
Zadok among the sons of Levi, which come near to the LORD to minister
unto him.

40:47 So he measured the court, an hundred cubits long, and an hundred
cubits broad, foursquare; and the altar that was before the house.

40:48 And he brought me to the porch of the house, and measured each
post of the porch, five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that
side: and the breadth of the gate was three cubits on this side, and
three cubits on that side.

40:49 The length of the porch was twenty cubits, and the breadth
eleven cubits, and he brought me by the steps whereby they went up to
it: and there were pillars by the posts, one on this side, and another
on that side.

41:1 Afterward he brought me to the temple, and measured the posts,
six cubits broad on the one side, and six cubits broad on the other
side, which was the breadth of the tabernacle.

41:2 And the breadth of the door was ten cubits; and the sides of the
door were five cubits on the one side, and five cubits on the other
side: and he measured the length thereof, forty cubits: and the
breadth, twenty cubits.

41:3 Then went he inward, and measured the post of the door, two
cubits; and the door, six cubits; and the breadth of the door, seven
cubits.

41:4 So he measured the length thereof, twenty cubits; and the
breadth, twenty cubits, before the temple: and he said unto me, This
is the most holy place.

41:5 After he measured the wall of the house, six cubits; and the
breadth of every side chamber, four cubits, round about the house on
every side.

41:6 And the side chambers were three, one over another, and thirty in
order; and they entered into the wall which was of the house for the
side chambers round about, that they might have hold, but they had not
hold in the wall of the house.

41:7 And there was an enlarging, and a winding about still upward to
the side chambers: for the winding about of the house went still
upward round about the house: therefore the breadth of the house was
still upward, and so increased from the lowest chamber to the highest
by the midst.

41:8 I saw also the height of the house round about: the foundations
of the side chambers were a full reed of six great cubits.

41:9 The thickness of the wall, which was for the side chamber
without, was five cubits: and that which was left was the place of the
side chambers that were within.

41:10 And between the chambers was the wideness of twenty cubits round
about the house on every side.

41:11 And the doors of the side chambers were toward the place that
was left, one door toward the north, and another door toward the
south: and the breadth of the place that was left was five cubits
round about.

41:12 Now the building that was before the separate place at the end
toward the west was seventy cubits broad; and the wall of the building
was five cubits thick round about, and the length thereof ninety
cubits.

41:13 So he measured the house, an hundred cubits long; and the
separate place, and the building, with the walls thereof, an hundred
cubits long; 41:14 Also the breadth of the face of the house, and of
the separate place toward the east, an hundred cubits.

41:15 And he measured the length of the building over against the
separate place which was behind it, and the galleries thereof on the
one side and on the other side, an hundred cubits, with the inner
temple, and the porches of the court; 41:16 The door posts, and the
narrow windows, and the galleries round about on their three stories,
over against the door, cieled with wood round about, and from the
ground up to the windows, and the windows were covered; 41:17 To that
above the door, even unto the inner house, and without, and by all the
wall round about within and without, by measure.

41:18 And it was made with cherubims and palm trees, so that a palm
tree was between a cherub and a cherub; and every cherub had two
faces; 41:19 So that the face of a man was toward the palm tree on the
one side, and the face of a young lion toward the palm tree on the
other side: it was made through all the house round about.

41:20 From the ground unto above the door were cherubims and palm
trees made, and on the wall of the temple.

41:21 The posts of the temple were squared, and the face of the
sanctuary; the appearance of the one as the appearance of the other.

41:22 The altar of wood was three cubits high, and the length thereof
two cubits; and the corners thereof, and the length thereof, and the
walls thereof, were of wood: and he said unto me, This is the table
that is before the LORD.

41:23 And the temple and the sanctuary had two doors.

41:24 And the doors had two leaves apiece, two turning leaves; two
leaves for the one door, and two leaves for the other door.

41:25 And there were made on them, on the doors of the temple,
cherubims and palm trees, like as were made upon the walls; and there
were thick planks upon the face of the porch without.

41:26 And there were narrow windows and palm trees on the one side and
on the other side, on the sides of the porch, and upon the side
chambers of the house, and thick planks.

42:1 Then he brought me forth into the utter court, the way toward the
north: and he brought me into the chamber that was over against the
separate place, and which was before the building toward the north.

42:2 Before the length of an hundred cubits was the north door, and
the breadth was fifty cubits.

42:3 Over against the twenty cubits which were for the inner court,
and over against the pavement which was for the utter court, was
gallery against gallery in three stories.

42:4 And before the chambers was a walk to ten cubits breadth inward,
a way of one cubit; and their doors toward the north.

42:5 Now the upper chambers were shorter: for the galleries were
higher than these, than the lower, and than the middlemost of the
building.

42:6 For they were in three stories, but had not pillars as the
pillars of the courts: therefore the building was straitened more than
the lowest and the middlemost from the ground.

42:7 And the wall that was without over against the chambers, toward
the utter court on the forepart of the chambers, the length thereof
was fifty cubits.

42:8 For the length of the chambers that were in the utter court was
fifty cubits: and, lo, before the temple were an hundred cubits.

42:9 And from under these chambers was the entry on the east side, as
one goeth into them from the utter court.

42:10 The chambers were in the thickness of the wall of the court
toward the east, over against the separate place, and over against the
building.

42:11 And the way before them was like the appearance of the chambers
which were toward the north, as long as they, and as broad as they:
and all their goings out were both according to their fashions, and
according to their doors.

42:12 And according to the doors of the chambers that were toward the
south was a door in the head of the way, even the way directly before
the wall toward the east, as one entereth into them.

42:13 Then said he unto me, The north chambers and the south chambers,
which are before the separate place, they be holy chambers, where the
priests that approach unto the LORD shall eat the most holy things:
there shall they lay the most holy things, and the meat offering, and
the sin offering, and the trespass offering; for the place is holy.

42:14 When the priests enter therein, then shall they not go out of
the holy place into the utter court, but there they shall lay their
garments wherein they minister; for they are holy; and shall put on
other garments, and shall approach to those things which are for the
people.

42:15 Now when he had made an end of measuring the inner house, he
brought me forth toward the gate whose prospect is toward the east,
and measured it round about.

42:16 He measured the east side with the measuring reed, five hundred
reeds, with the measuring reed round about.

42:17 He measured the north side, five hundred reeds, with the
measuring reed round about.

42:18 He measured the south side, five hundred reeds, with the
measuring reed.

42:19 He turned about to the west side, and measured five hundred
reeds with the measuring reed.

42:20 He measured it by the four sides: it had a wall round about,
five hundred reeds long, and five hundred broad, to make a separation
between the sanctuary and the profane place.

43:1 Afterward he brought me to the gate, even the gate that looketh
toward the east: 43:2 And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came
from the way of the east: and his voice was like a noise of many
waters: and the earth shined with his glory.

43:3 And it was according to the appearance of the vision which I saw,
even according to the vision that I saw when I came to destroy the
city: and the visions were like the vision that I saw by the river
Chebar; and I fell upon my face.

43:4 And the glory of the LORD came into the house by the way of the
gate whose prospect is toward the east.

43:5 So the spirit took me up, and brought me into the inner court;
and, behold, the glory of the LORD filled the house.

43:6 And I heard him speaking unto me out of the house; and the man
stood by me.

43:7 And he said unto me, Son of man, the place of my throne, and the
place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the
children of Israel for ever, and my holy name, shall the house of
Israel no more defile, neither they, nor their kings, by their
whoredom, nor by the carcases of their kings in their high places.

43:8 In their setting of their threshold by my thresholds, and their
post by my posts, and the wall between me and them, they have even
defiled my holy name by their abominations that they have committed:
wherefore I have consumed them in mine anger.

43:9 Now let them put away their whoredom, and the carcases of their
kings, far from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever.

43:10 Thou son of man, shew the house to the house of Israel, that
they may be ashamed of their iniquities: and let them measure the
pattern.

43:11 And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, shew them the
form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out
thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and
all the ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the
laws thereof: and write it in their sight, that they may keep the
whole form thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them.

43:12 This is the law of the house; Upon the top of the mountain the
whole limit thereof round about shall be most holy. Behold, this is
the law of the house.

43:13 And these are the measures of the altar after the cubits: The
cubit is a cubit and an hand breadth; even the bottom shall be a
cubit, and the breadth a cubit, and the border thereof by the edge
thereof round about shall be a span: and this shall be the higher
place of the altar.

43:14 And from the bottom upon the ground even to the lower settle
shall be two cubits, and the breadth one cubit; and from the lesser
settle even to the greater settle shall be four cubits, and the
breadth one cubit.

43:15 So the altar shall be four cubits; and from the altar and upward
shall be four horns.

43:16 And the altar shall be twelve cubits long, twelve broad, square
in the four squares thereof.

43:17 And the settle shall be fourteen cubits long and fourteen broad
in the four squares thereof; and the border about it shall be half a
cubit; and the bottom thereof shall be a cubit about; and his stairs
shall look toward the east.

43:18 And he said unto me, Son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD; These
are the ordinances of the altar in the day when they shall make it, to
offer burnt offerings thereon, and to sprinkle blood thereon.

43:19 And thou shalt give to the priests the Levites that be of the
seed of Zadok, which approach unto me, to minister unto me, saith the
Lord GOD, a young bullock for a sin offering.

43:20 And thou shalt take of the blood thereof, and put it on the four
horns of it, and on the four corners of the settle, and upon the
border round about: thus shalt thou cleanse and purge it.

43:21 Thou shalt take the bullock also of the sin offering, and he
shall burn it in the appointed place of the house, without the
sanctuary.

43:22 And on the second day thou shalt offer a kid of the goats
without blemish for a sin offering; and they shall cleanse the altar,
as they did cleanse it with the bullock.

43:23 When thou hast made an end of cleansing it, thou shalt offer a
young bullock without blemish, and a ram out of the flock without
blemish.

43:24 And thou shalt offer them before the LORD, and the priests shall
cast salt upon them, and they shall offer them up for a burnt offering
unto the LORD.

43:25 Seven days shalt thou prepare every day a goat for a sin
offering: they shall also prepare a young bullock, and a ram out of
the flock, without blemish.

43:26 Seven days shall they purge the altar and purify it; and they
shall consecrate themselves.

43:27 And when these days are expired, it shall be, that upon the
eighth day, and so forward, the priests shall make your burnt
offerings upon the altar, and your peace offerings; and I will accept
you, saith the Lord GOD.

44:1 Then he brought me back the way of the gate of the outward
sanctuary which looketh toward the east; and it was shut.

44:2 Then said the LORD unto me; This gate shall be shut, it shall not
be opened, and no man shall enter in by it; because the LORD, the God
of Israel, hath entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut.

44:3 It is for the prince; the prince, he shall sit in it to eat bread
before the LORD; he shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate,
and shall go out by the way of the same.

44:4 Then brought he me the way of the north gate before the house:
and I looked, and, behold, the glory of the LORD filled the house of
the LORD: and I fell upon my face.

44:5 And the LORD said unto me, Son of man, mark well, and behold with
thine eyes, and hear with thine ears all that I say unto thee
concerning all the ordinances of the house of the LORD, and all the
laws thereof; and mark well the entering in of the house, with every
going forth of the sanctuary.

44:6 And thou shalt say to the rebellious, even to the house of
Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; O ye house of Israel, let it suffice
you of all your abominations, 44:7 In that ye have brought into my
sanctuary strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in
flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to pollute it, even my house, when ye
offer my bread, the fat and the blood, and they have broken my
covenant because of all your abominations.

44:8 And ye have not kept the charge of mine holy things: but ye have
set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for yourselves.

44:9 Thus saith the Lord GOD; No stranger, uncircumcised in heart, nor
uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary, of any stranger
that is among the children of Israel.

44:10 And the Levites that are gone away far from me, when Israel went
astray, which went astray away from me after their idols; they shall
even bear their iniquity.

44:11 Yet they shall be ministers in my sanctuary, having charge at
the gates of the house, and ministering to the house: they shall slay
the burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they shall
stand before them to minister unto them.

44:12 Because they ministered unto them before their idols, and caused
the house of Israel to fall into iniquity; therefore have I lifted up
mine hand against them, saith the Lord GOD, and they shall bear their
iniquity.
