
44:13 And they shall not come near unto me, to do the office of a
priest unto me, nor to come near to any of my holy things, in the most
holy place: but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations
which they have committed.

44:14 But I will make them keepers of the charge of the house, for all
the service thereof, and for all that shall be done therein.

44:15 But the priests the Levites, the sons of Zadok, that kept the
charge of my sanctuary when the children of Israel went astray from
me, they shall come near to me to minister unto me, and they shall
stand before me to offer unto me the fat and the blood, saith the Lord
GOD: 44:16 They shall enter into my sanctuary, and they shall come
near to my table, to minister unto me, and they shall keep my charge.

44:17 And it shall come to pass, that when they enter in at the gates
of the inner court, they shall be clothed with linen garments; and no
wool shall come upon them, whiles they minister in the gates of the
inner court, and within.

44:18 They shall have linen bonnets upon their heads, and shall have
linen breeches upon their loins; they shall not gird themselves with
any thing that causeth sweat.

44:19 And when they go forth into the utter court, even into the utter
court to the people, they shall put off their garments wherein they
ministered, and lay them in the holy chambers, and they shall put on
other garments; and they shall not sanctify the people with their
garments.

44:20 Neither shall they shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to
grow long; they shall only poll their heads.

44:21 Neither shall any priest drink wine, when they enter into the
inner court.

44:22 Neither shall they take for their wives a widow, nor her that is
put away: but they shall take maidens of the seed of the house of
Israel, or a widow that had a priest before.

44:23 And they shall teach my people the difference between the holy
and profane, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the
clean.

44:24 And in controversy they shall stand in judgment; and they shall
judge it according to my judgments: and they shall keep my laws and my
statutes in all mine assemblies; and they shall hallow my sabbaths.

44:25 And they shall come at no dead person to defile themselves: but
for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother,
or for sister that hath had no husband, they may defile themselves.

44:26 And after he is cleansed, they shall reckon unto him seven days.

44:27 And in the day that he goeth into the sanctuary, unto the inner
court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall offer his sin offering,
saith the Lord GOD.

44:28 And it shall be unto them for an inheritance: I am their
inheritance: and ye shall give them no possession in Israel: I am
their possession.

44:29 They shall eat the meat offering, and the sin offering, and the
trespass offering: and every dedicated thing in Israel shall be
theirs.

44:30 And the first of all the firstfruits of all things, and every
oblation of all, of every sort of your oblations, shall be the
priest's: ye shall also give unto the priest the first of your dough,
that he may cause the blessing to rest in thine house.

44:31 The priests shall not eat of any thing that is dead of itself,
or torn, whether it be fowl or beast.

45:1 Moreover, when ye shall divide by lot the land for inheritance,
ye shall offer an oblation unto the LORD, an holy portion of the land:
the length shall be the length of five and twenty thousand reeds, and
the breadth shall be ten thousand. This shall be holy in all the
borders thereof round about.

45:2 Of this there shall be for the sanctuary five hundred in length,
with five hundred in breadth, square round about; and fifty cubits
round about for the suburbs thereof.

45:3 And of this measure shalt thou measure the length of five and
twenty thousand, and the breadth of ten thousand: and in it shall be
the sanctuary and the most holy place.

45:4 The holy portion of the land shall be for the priests the
ministers of the sanctuary, which shall come near to minister unto the
LORD: and it shall be a place for their houses, and an holy place for
the sanctuary.

45:5 And the five and twenty thousand of length, and the ten thousand
of breadth shall also the Levites, the ministers of the house, have
for themselves, for a possession for twenty chambers.

45:6 And ye shall appoint the possession of the city five thousand
broad, and five and twenty thousand long, over against the oblation of
the holy portion: it shall be for the whole house of Israel.

45:7 And a portion shall be for the prince on the one side and on the
other side of the oblation of the holy portion, and of the possession
of the city, before the oblation of the holy portion, and before the
possession of the city, from the west side westward, and from the east
side eastward: and the length shall be over against one of the
portions, from the west border unto the east border.

45:8 In the land shall be his possession in Israel: and my princes
shall no more oppress my people; and the rest of the land shall they
give to the house of Israel according to their tribes.

45:9 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Let it suffice you, O princes of Israel:
remove violence and spoil, and execute judgment and justice, take away
your exactions from my people, saith the Lord GOD.

45:10 Ye shall have just balances, and a just ephah, and a just bath.

45:11 The ephah and the bath shall be of one measure, that the bath
may contain the tenth part of an homer, and the ephah the tenth part
of an homer: the measure thereof shall be after the homer.

45:12 And the shekel shall be twenty gerahs: twenty shekels, five and
twenty shekels, fifteen shekels, shall be your maneh.

45:13 This is the oblation that ye shall offer; the sixth part of an
ephah of an homer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of an
ephah of an homer of barley: 45:14 Concerning the ordinance of oil,
the bath of oil, ye shall offer the tenth part of a bath out of the
cor, which is an homer of ten baths; for ten baths are an homer: 45:15
And one lamb out of the flock, out of two hundred, out of the fat
pastures of Israel; for a meat offering, and for a burnt offering, and
for peace offerings, to make reconciliation for them, saith the Lord
GOD.

45:16 All the people of the land shall give this oblation for the
prince in Israel.

45:17 And it shall be the prince's part to give burnt offerings, and
meat offerings, and drink offerings, in the feasts, and in the new
moons, and in the sabbaths, in all solemnities of the house of Israel:
he shall prepare the sin offering, and the meat offering, and the
burnt offering, and the peace offerings, to make reconciliation for
the house of Israel.

45:18 Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the first month, in the first day of
the month, thou shalt take a young bullock without blemish, and
cleanse the sanctuary: 45:19 And the priest shall take of the blood of
the sin offering, and put it upon the posts of the house, and upon the
four corners of the settle of the altar, and upon the posts of the
gate of the inner court.

45:20 And so thou shalt do the seventh day of the month for every one
that erreth, and for him that is simple: so shall ye reconcile the
house.

45:21 In the first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall
have the passover, a feast of seven days; unleavened bread shall be
eaten.

45:22 And upon that day shall the prince prepare for himself and for
all the people of the land a bullock for a sin offering.

45:23 And seven days of the feast he shall prepare a burnt offering to
the LORD, seven bullocks and seven rams without blemish daily the
seven days; and a kid of the goats daily for a sin offering.

45:24 And he shall prepare a meat offering of an ephah for a bullock,
and an ephah for a ram, and an hin of oil for an ephah.

45:25 In the seventh month, in the fifteenth day of the month, shall
he do the like in the feast of the seven days, according to the sin
offering, according to the burnt offering, and according to the meat
offering, and according to the oil.

46:1 Thus saith the Lord GOD; The gate of the inner court that looketh
toward the east shall be shut the six working days; but on the sabbath
it shall be opened, and in the day of the new moon it shall be opened.

46:2 And the prince shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate
without, and shall stand by the post of the gate, and the priests
shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, and he shall
worship at the threshold of the gate: then he shall go forth; but the
gate shall not be shut until the evening.

46:3 Likewise the people of the land shall worship at the door of this
gate before the LORD in the sabbaths and in the new moons.

46:4 And the burnt offering that the prince shall offer unto the LORD
in the sabbath day shall be six lambs without blemish, and a ram
without blemish.

46:5 And the meat offering shall be an ephah for a ram, and the meat
offering for the lambs as he shall be able to give, and an hin of oil
to an ephah.

46:6 And in the day of the new moon it shall be a young bullock
without blemish, and six lambs, and a ram: they shall be without
blemish.

46:7 And he shall prepare a meat offering, an ephah for a bullock, and
an ephah for a ram, and for the lambs according as his hand shall
attain unto, and an hin of oil to an ephah.

46:8 And when the prince shall enter, he shall go in by the way of the
porch of that gate, and he shall go forth by the way thereof.

46:9 But when the people of the land shall come before the LORD in the
solemn feasts, he that entereth in by the way of the north gate to
worship shall go out by the way of the south gate; and he that
entereth by the way of the south gate shall go forth by the way of the
north gate: he shall not return by the way of the gate whereby he came
in, but shall go forth over against it.

46:10 And the prince in the midst of them, when they go in, shall go
in; and when they go forth, shall go forth.

46:11 And in the feasts and in the solemnities the meat offering shall
be an ephah to a bullock, and an ephah to a ram, and to the lambs as
he is able to give, and an hin of oil to an ephah.

46:12 Now when the prince shall prepare a voluntary burnt offering or
peace offerings voluntarily unto the LORD, one shall then open him the
gate that looketh toward the east, and he shall prepare his burnt
offering and his peace offerings, as he did on the sabbath day: then
he shall go forth; and after his going forth one shall shut the gate.

46:13 Thou shalt daily prepare a burnt offering unto the LORD of a
lamb of the first year without blemish: thou shalt prepare it every
morning.

46:14 And thou shalt prepare a meat offering for it every morning, the
sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of an hin of oil, to temper
with the fine flour; a meat offering continually by a perpetual
ordinance unto the LORD.

46:15 Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and the meat offering, and the
oil, every morning for a continual burnt offering.

46:16 Thus saith the Lord GOD; If the prince give a gift unto any of
his sons, the inheritance thereof shall be his sons'; it shall be
their possession by inheritance.

46:17 But if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants,
then it shall be his to the year of liberty; after it shall return to
the prince: but his inheritance shall be his sons' for them.

46:18 Moreover the prince shall not take of the people's inheritance
by oppression, to thrust them out of their possession; but he shall
give his sons inheritance out of his own possession: that my people be
not scattered every man from his possession.

46:19 After he brought me through the entry, which was at the side of
the gate, into the holy chambers of the priests, which looked toward
the north: and, behold, there was a place on the two sides westward.

46:20 Then said he unto me, This is the place where the priests shall
boil the trespass offering and the sin offering, where they shall bake
the meat offering; that they bear them not out into the utter court,
to sanctify the people.

46:21 Then he brought me forth into the utter court, and caused me to
pass by the four corners of the court; and, behold, in every corner of
the court there was a court.

46:22 In the four corners of the court there were courts joined of
forty cubits long and thirty broad: these four corners were of one
measure.

46:23 And there was a row of building round about in them, round about
them four, and it was made with boiling places under the rows round
about.

46:24 Then said he unto me, These are the places of them that boil,
where the ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifice of the
people.

47:1 Afterward he brought me again unto the door of the house; and,
behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the house
eastward: for the forefront of the house stood toward the east, and
the waters came down from under from the right side of the house, at
the south side of the altar.

47:2 Then brought he me out of the way of the gate northward, and led
me about the way without unto the utter gate by the way that looketh
eastward; and, behold, there ran out waters on the right side.

47:3 And when the man that had the line in his hand went forth
eastward, he measured a thousand cubits, and he brought me through the
waters; the waters were to the ankles.

47:4 Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through the waters;
the waters were to the knees. Again he measured a thousand, and
brought me through; the waters were to the loins.

47:5 Afterward he measured a thousand; and it was a river that I could
not pass over: for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river
that could not be passed over.

47:6 And he said unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen this? Then he
brought me, and caused me to return to the brink of the river.

47:7 Now when I had returned, behold, at the bank of the river were
very many trees on the one side and on the other.

47:8 Then said he unto me, These waters issue out toward the east
country, and go down into the desert, and go into the sea: which being
brought forth into the sea, the waters shall be healed.

47:9 And it shall come to pass, that every thing that liveth, which
moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live: and there
shall be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shall
come thither: for they shall be healed; and every thing shall live
whither the river cometh.

47:10 And it shall come to pass, that the fishers shall stand upon it
from Engedi even unto Eneglaim; they shall be a place to spread forth
nets; their fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the
great sea, exceeding many.

47:11 But the miry places thereof and the marishes thereof shall not
be healed; they shall be given to salt.

47:12 And by the river upon the bank thereof, on this side and on that
side, shall grow all trees for meat, whose leaf shall not fade,
neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed: it shall bring forth new
fruit according to his months, because their waters they issued out of
the sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf
thereof for medicine.

47:13 Thus saith the Lord GOD; This shall be the border, whereby ye
shall inherit the land according to the twelve tribes of Israel:
Joseph shall have two portions.

47:14 And ye shall inherit it, one as well as another: concerning the
which I lifted up mine hand to give it unto your fathers: and this
land shall fall unto you for inheritance.

47:15 And this shall be the border of the land toward the north side,
from the great sea, the way of Hethlon, as men go to Zedad; 47:16
Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is between the border of Damascus and
the border of Hamath; Hazarhatticon, which is by the coast of Hauran.

47:17 And the border from the sea shall be Hazarenan, the border of
Damascus, and the north northward, and the border of Hamath. And this
is the north side.

47:18 And the east side ye shall measure from Hauran, and from
Damascus, and from Gilead, and from the land of Israel by Jordan, from
the border unto the east sea. And this is the east side.

47:19 And the south side southward, from Tamar even to the waters of
strife in Kadesh, the river to the great sea. And this is the south
side southward.

47:20 The west side also shall be the great sea from the border, till
a man come over against Hamath. This is the west side.

47:21 So shall ye divide this land unto you according to the tribes of
Israel.

47:22 And it shall come to pass, that ye shall divide it by lot for an
inheritance unto you, and to the strangers that sojourn among you,
which shall beget children among you: and they shall be unto you as
born in the country among the children of Israel; they shall have
inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel.

47:23 And it shall come to pass, that in what tribe the stranger
sojourneth, there shall ye give him his inheritance, saith the Lord
GOD.

48:1 Now these are the names of the tribes. From the north end to the
coast of the way of Hethlon, as one goeth to Hamath, Hazarenan, the
border of Damascus northward, to the coast of Hamath; for these are
his sides east and west; a portion for Dan.

48:2 And by the border of Dan, from the east side unto the west side,
a portion for Asher.

48:3 And by the border of Asher, from the east side even unto the west
side, a portion for Naphtali.

48:4 And by the border of Naphtali, from the east side unto the west
side, a portion for Manasseh.

48:5 And by the border of Manasseh, from the east side unto the west
side, a portion for Ephraim.

48:6 And by the border of Ephraim, from the east side even unto the
west side, a portion for Reuben.

48:7 And by the border of Reuben, from the east side unto the west
side, a portion for Judah.

48:8 And by the border of Judah, from the east side unto the west
side, shall be the offering which ye shall offer of five and twenty
thousand reeds in breadth, and in length as one of the other parts,
from the east side unto the west side: and the sanctuary shall be in
the midst of it.

48:9 The oblation that ye shall offer unto the LORD shall be of five
and twenty thousand in length, and of ten thousand in breadth.

48:10 And for them, even for the priests, shall be this holy oblation;
toward the north five and twenty thousand in length, and toward the
west ten thousand in breadth, and toward the east ten thousand in
breadth, and toward the south five and twenty thousand in length: and
the sanctuary of the LORD shall be in the midst thereof.

48:11 It shall be for the priests that are sanctified of the sons of
Zadok; which have kept my charge, which went not astray when the
children of Israel went astray, as the Levites went astray.

48:12 And this oblation of the land that is offered shall be unto them
a thing most holy by the border of the Levites.

48:13 And over against the border of the priests the Levites shall
have five and twenty thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth:
all the length shall be five and twenty thousand, and the breadth ten
thousand.

48:14 And they shall not sell of it, neither exchange, nor alienate
the firstfruits of the land: for it is holy unto the LORD.

48:15 And the five thousand, that are left in the breadth over against
the five and twenty thousand, shall be a profane place for the city,
for dwelling, and for suburbs: and the city shall be in the midst
thereof.

48:16 And these shall be the measures thereof; the north side four
thousand and five hundred, and the south side four thousand and five
hundred, and on the east side four thousand and five hundred, and the
west side four thousand and five hundred.

48:17 And the suburbs of the city shall be toward the north two
hundred and fifty, and toward the south two hundred and fifty, and
toward the east two hundred and fifty, and toward the west two hundred
and fifty.

48:18 And the residue in length over against the oblation of the holy
portion shall be ten thousand eastward, and ten thousand westward: and
it shall be over against the oblation of the holy portion; and the
increase thereof shall be for food unto them that serve the city.

48:19 And they that serve the city shall serve it out of all the
tribes of Israel.

48:20 All the oblation shall be five and twenty thousand by five and
twenty thousand: ye shall offer the holy oblation foursquare, with the
possession of the city.

48:21 And the residue shall be for the prince, on the one side and on
the other of the holy oblation, and of the possession of the city,
over against the five and twenty thousand of the oblation toward the
east border, and westward over against the five and twenty thousand
toward the west border, over against the portions for the prince: and
it shall be the holy oblation; and the sanctuary of the house shall be
in the midst thereof.

48:22 Moreover from the possession of the Levites, and from the
possession of the city, being in the midst of that which is the
prince's, between the border of Judah and the border of Benjamin,
shall be for the prince.

48:23 As for the rest of the tribes, from the east side unto the west
side, Benjamin shall have a portion.

48:24 And by the border of Benjamin, from the east side unto the west
side, Simeon shall have a portion.

48:25 And by the border of Simeon, from the east side unto the west
side, Issachar a portion.

48:26 And by the border of Issachar, from the east side unto the west
side, Zebulun a portion.

48:27 And by the border of Zebulun, from the east side unto the west
side, Gad a portion.

48:28 And by the border of Gad, at the south side southward, the
border shall be even from Tamar unto the waters of strife in Kadesh,
and to the river toward the great sea.

48:29 This is the land which ye shall divide by lot unto the tribes of
Israel for inheritance, and these are their portions, saith the Lord
GOD.

48:30 And these are the goings out of the city on the north side, four
thousand and five hundred measures.

48:31 And the gates of the city shall be after the names of the tribes
of Israel: three gates northward; one gate of Reuben, one gate of
Judah, one gate of Levi.

48:32 And at the east side four thousand and five hundred: and three
gates; and one gate of Joseph, one gate of Benjamin, one gate of Dan.

48:33 And at the south side four thousand and five hundred measures:
and three gates; one gate of Simeon, one gate of Issachar, one gate of
Zebulun.

48:34 At the west side four thousand and five hundred, with their
three gates; one gate of Gad, one gate of Asher, one gate of Naphtali.

48:35 It was round about eighteen thousand measures: and the name of
the city from that day shall be, The LORD is there.




The Book of Daniel


1:1 In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah came
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it.

1:2 And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, with part
of the vessels of the house of God: which he carried into the land of
Shinar to the house of his god; and he brought the vessels into the
treasure house of his god.

1:3 And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that
he should bring certain of the children of Israel, and of the king's
seed, and of the princes; 1:4 Children in whom was no blemish, but
well favoured, and skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge,
and understanding science, and such as had ability in them to stand in
the king's palace, and whom they might teach the learning and the
tongue of the Chaldeans.

1:5 And the king appointed them a daily provision of the king's meat,
and of the wine which he drank: so nourishing them three years, that
at the end thereof they might stand before the king.

1:6 Now among these were of the children of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah,
Mishael, and Azariah: 1:7 Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs gave
names: for he gave unto Daniel the name of Belteshazzar; and to
Hananiah, of Shadrach; and to Mishael, of Meshach; and to Azariah, of
Abednego.

1:8 But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself
with the portion of the king's meat, nor with the wine which he drank:
therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not
defile himself.

1:9 Now God had brought Daniel into favour and tender love with the
prince of the eunuchs.

1:10 And the prince of the eunuchs said unto Daniel, I fear my lord
the king, who hath appointed your meat and your drink: for why should
he see your faces worse liking than the children which are of your
sort? then shall ye make me endanger my head to the king.

1:11 Then said Daniel to Melzar, whom the prince of the eunuchs had
set over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, 1:12 Prove thy
servants, I beseech thee, ten days; and let them give us pulse to eat,
and water to drink.

1:13 Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and the
countenance of the children that eat of the portion of the king's
meat: and as thou seest, deal with thy servants.

1:14 So he consented to them in this matter, and proved them ten days.

1:15 And at the end of ten days their countenances appeared fairer and
fatter in flesh than all the children which did eat the portion of the
king's meat.

1:16 Thus Melzar took away the portion of their meat, and the wine
that they should drink; and gave them pulse.

1:17 As for these four children, God gave them knowledge and skill in
all learning and wisdom: and Daniel had understanding in all visions
and dreams.

1:18 Now at the end of the days that the king had said he should bring
them in, then the prince of the eunuchs brought them in before
Nebuchadnezzar.

1:19 And the king communed with them; and among them all was found
none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: therefore stood they
before the king.

1:20 And in all matters of wisdom and understanding, that the king
enquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the
magicians and astrologers that were in all his realm.

1:21 And Daniel continued even unto the first year of king Cyrus.

2:1 And in the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar
Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams, wherewith his spirit was troubled, and
his sleep brake from him.

2:2 Then the king commanded to call the magicians, and the
astrologers, and the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, for to shew the
king his dreams. So they came and stood before the king.

2:3 And the king said unto them, I have dreamed a dream, and my spirit
was troubled to know the dream.

2:4 Then spake the Chaldeans to the king in Syriack, O king, live for
ever: tell thy servants the dream, and we will shew the
interpretation.

2:5 The king answered and said to the Chaldeans, The thing is gone
from me: if ye will not make known unto me the dream, with the
interpretation thereof, ye shall be cut in pieces, and your houses
shall be made a dunghill.

2:6 But if ye shew the dream, and the interpretation thereof, ye shall
receive of me gifts and rewards and great honour: therefore shew me
the dream, and the interpretation thereof.

2:7 They answered again and said, Let the king tell his servants the
dream, and we will shew the interpretation of it.

2:8 The king answered and said, I know of certainty that ye would gain
the time, because ye see the thing is gone from me.

2:9 But if ye will not make known unto me the dream, there is but one
decree for you: for ye have prepared lying and corrupt words to speak
before me, till the time be changed: therefore tell me the dream, and
I shall know that ye can shew me the interpretation thereof.

2:10 The Chaldeans answered before the king, and said, There is not a
man upon the earth that can shew the king's matter: therefore there is
no king, lord, nor ruler, that asked such things at any magician, or
astrologer, or Chaldean.

2:11 And it is a rare thing that the king requireth, and there is none
other that can shew it before the king, except the gods, whose
dwelling is not with flesh.

2:12 For this cause the king was angry and very furious, and commanded
to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.

2:13 And the decree went forth that the wise men should be slain; and
they sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain.

2:14 Then Daniel answered with counsel and wisdom to Arioch the
captain of the king's guard, which was gone forth to slay the wise men
of Babylon: 2:15 He answered and said to Arioch the king's captain,
Why is the decree so hasty from the king? Then Arioch made the thing
known to Daniel.

2:16 Then Daniel went in, and desired of the king that he would give
him time, and that he would shew the king the interpretation.

2:17 Then Daniel went to his house, and made the thing known to
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions: 2:18 That they would
desire mercies of the God of heaven concerning this secret; that
Daniel and his fellows should not perish with the rest of the wise men
of Babylon.

2:19 Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision. Then
Daniel blessed the God of heaven.

2:20 Daniel answered and said, Blessed be the name of God for ever and
ever: for wisdom and might are his: 2:21 And he changeth the times and
the seasons: he removeth kings, and setteth up kings: he giveth wisdom
unto the wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding: 2:22 He
revealeth the deep and secret things: he knoweth what is in the
darkness, and the light dwelleth with him.

2:23 I thank thee, and praise thee, O thou God of my fathers, who hast
given me wisdom and might, and hast made known unto me now what we
desired of thee: for thou hast now made known unto us the king's
matter.

2:24 Therefore Daniel went in unto Arioch, whom the king had ordained
to destroy the wise men of Babylon: he went and said thus unto him;
Destroy not the wise men of Babylon: bring me in before the king, and
I will shew unto the king the interpretation.

2:25 Then Arioch brought in Daniel before the king in haste, and said
thus unto him, I have found a man of the captives of Judah, that will
make known unto the king the interpretation.

2:26 The king answered and said to Daniel, whose name was
Belteshazzar, Art thou able to make known unto me the dream which I
have seen, and the interpretation thereof?  2:27 Daniel answered in
the presence of the king, and said, The secret which the king hath
demanded cannot the wise men, the astrologers, the magicians, the
soothsayers, shew unto the king; 2:28 But there is a God in heaven
that revealeth secrets, and maketh known to the king Nebuchadnezzar
what shall be in the latter days. Thy dream, and the visions of thy
head upon thy bed, are these; 2:29 As for thee, O king, thy thoughts
came into thy mind upon thy bed, what should come to pass hereafter:
and he that revealeth secrets maketh known to thee what shall come to
pass.

2:30 But as for me, this secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom
that I have more than any living, but for their sakes that shall make
known the interpretation to the king, and that thou mightest know the
thoughts of thy heart.

2:31 Thou, O king, sawest, and behold a great image. This great image,
whose brightness was excellent, stood before thee; and the form
thereof was terrible.

2:32 This image's head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms of
silver, his belly and his thighs of brass, 2:33 His legs of iron, his
feet part of iron and part of clay.

2:34 Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands, which
smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake
them to pieces.

2:35 Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold,
broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer
threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was
found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great
mountain, and filled the whole earth.

2:36 This is the dream; and we will tell the interpretation thereof
before the king.

2:37 Thou, O king, art a king of kings: for the God of heaven hath
given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.

2:38 And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the
field and the fowls of the heaven hath he given into thine hand, and
hath made thee ruler over them all. Thou art this head of gold.

2:39 And after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee, and
another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the
earth.

2:40 And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron
breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things: and as iron that breaketh
all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise.

2:41 And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters' clay,
and part of iron, the kingdom shall be divided; but there shall be in
it of the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron
mixed with miry clay.

2:42 And as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part of clay,
so the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken.

2:43 And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall
mingle themselves with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave one
to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.

2:44 And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a
kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be
left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all
these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

2:45 Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the
mountain without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the
brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made
known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the dream is
certain, and the interpretation thereof sure.

2:46 Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, and worshipped
Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet
odours unto him.

2:47 The king answered unto Daniel, and said, Of a truth it is, that
your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of
secrets, seeing thou couldest reveal this secret.

2:48 Then the king made Daniel a great man, and gave him many great
gifts, and made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon, and
chief of the governors over all the wise men of Babylon.

2:49 Then Daniel requested of the king, and he set Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego, over the affairs of the province of Babylon: but Daniel
sat in the gate of the king.

3:1 Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height was
threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits: he set it up in
the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon.

3:2 Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the princes,
the governors, and the captains, the judges, the treasurers, the
counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to
come to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had
set up.

3:3 Then the princes, the governors, and captains, the judges, the
treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the
provinces, were gathered together unto the dedication of the image
that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and they stood before the
image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.

3:4 Then an herald cried aloud, To you it is commanded, O people,
nations, and languages, 3:5 That at what time ye hear the sound of the
cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of
musick, ye fall down and worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar
the king hath set up: 3:6 And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth
shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.

3:7 Therefore at that time, when all the people heard the sound of the
cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and all kinds of musick, all
the people, the nations, and the languages, fell down and worshipped
the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.

3:8 Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near, and accused
the Jews.

3:9 They spake and said to the king Nebuchadnezzar, O king, live for
ever.

3:10 Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that every man that shall hear
the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer,
and all kinds of musick, shall fall down and worship the golden image:
3:11 And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, that he should be
cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.

3:12 There are certain Jews whom thou hast set over the affairs of the
province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego; these men, O
king, have not regarded thee: they serve not thy gods, nor worship the
golden image which thou hast set up.

3:13 Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury commanded to bring
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Then they brought these men before
the king.

3:14 Nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto them, Is it true, O Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, do not ye serve my gods, nor worship the golden
image which I have set up?  3:15 Now if ye be ready that at what time
ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and
dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship the image
which I have made; well: but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the
same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace; and who is that
God that shall deliver you out of my hands?  3:16 Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego, answered and said to the king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are
not careful to answer thee in this matter.

3:17 If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the
burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O
king.

3:18 But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve
thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.

3:19 Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his visage
was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego: therefore he
spake, and commanded that they should heat the furnace one seven times
more than it was wont to be heated.

3:20 And he commanded the most mighty men that were in his army to
bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, and to cast them into the
burning fiery furnace.

3:21 Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their
hats, and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the
burning fiery furnace.

3:22 Therefore because the king's commandment was urgent, and the
furnace exceeding hot, the flames of the fire slew those men that took
up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.

3:23 And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell down
bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.

3:24 Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonied, and rose up in haste,
and spake, and said unto his counsellors, Did not we cast three men
bound into the midst of the fire? They answered and said unto the
king, True, O king.

3:25 He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the
midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth
is like the Son of God.

3:26 Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the burning fiery
furnace, and spake, and said, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, ye
servants of the most high God, come forth, and come hither. Then
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, came forth of the midst of the fire.

3:27 And the princes, governors, and captains, and the king's
counsellors, being gathered together, saw these men, upon whose bodies
the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed, neither
were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them.

3:28 Then Nebuchadnezzar spake, and said, Blessed be the God of
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who hath sent his angel, and
delivered his servants that trusted in him, and have changed the
king's word, and yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor
worship any god, except their own God.

3:29 Therefore I make a decree, That every people, nation, and
language, which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall
be made a dunghill: because there is no other God that can deliver
after this sort.

3:30 Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, in the
province of Babylon.

4:1 Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all people, nations, and languages,
that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.

4:2 I thought it good to shew the signs and wonders that the high God
hath wrought toward me.

4:3 How great are his signs! and how mighty are his wonders! his
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is from generation
to generation.

4:4 I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine house, and flourishing in my
palace: 4:5 I saw a dream which made me afraid, and the thoughts upon
my bed and the visions of my head troubled me.

4:6 Therefore made I a decree to bring in all the wise men of Babylon
before me, that they might make known unto me the interpretation of
the dream.

4:7 Then came in the magicians, the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and
the soothsayers: and I told the dream before them; but they did not
make known unto me the interpretation thereof.

4:8 But at the last Daniel came in before me, whose name was
Belteshazzar, according to the name of my God, and in whom is the
spirit of the holy gods: and before him I told the dream, saying, 4:9
O Belteshazzar, master of the magicians, because I know that the
spirit of the holy gods is in thee, and no secret troubleth thee, tell
me the visions of my dream that I have seen, and the interpretation
thereof.

4:10 Thus were the visions of mine head in my bed; I saw, and behold a
tree in the midst of the earth, and the height thereof was great.

4:11 The tree grew, and was strong, and the height thereof reached
unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the earth: 4:12
The leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it
was meat for all: the beasts of the field had shadow under it, and the
fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed
of it.

4:13 I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, and, behold, a
watcher and an holy one came down from heaven; 4:14 He cried aloud,
and said thus, Hew down the tree, and cut off his branches, shake off
his leaves, and scatter his fruit: let the beasts get away from under
it, and the fowls from his branches: 4:15 Nevertheless leave the stump
of his roots in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the
tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven,
and let his portion be with the beasts in the grass of the earth: 4:16
Let his heart be changed from man's, and let a beast's heart be given
unto him; and let seven times pass over him.

4:17 This matter is by the decree of the watchers, and the demand by
the word of the holy ones: to the intent that the living may know that
the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to
whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the basest of men.

4:18 This dream I king Nebuchadnezzar have seen. Now thou, O
Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation thereof, forasmuch as all the
wise men of my kingdom are not able to make known unto me the
interpretation: but thou art able; for the spirit of the holy gods is
in thee.

4:19 Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, was astonied for one
hour, and his thoughts troubled him. The king spake, and said,
Belteshazzar, let not the dream, or the interpretation thereof,
trouble thee. Belteshazzar answered and said, My lord, the dream be to
them that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies.

4:20 The tree that thou sawest, which grew, and was strong, whose
height reached unto the heaven, and the sight thereof to all the
earth; 4:21 Whose leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in
it was meat for all; under which the beasts of the field dwelt, and
upon whose branches the fowls of the heaven had their habitation: 4:22
It is thou, O king, that art grown and become strong: for thy
greatness is grown, and reacheth unto heaven, and thy dominion to the
end of the earth.

4:23 And whereas the king saw a watcher and an holy one coming down
from heaven, and saying, Hew the tree down, and destroy it; yet leave
the stump of the roots thereof in the earth, even with a band of iron
and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with
the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts of the
field, till seven times pass over him; 4:24 This is the
interpretation, O king, and this is the decree of the most High, which
is come upon my lord the king: 4:25 That they shall drive thee from
men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, and they
shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and they shall wet thee with the
dew of heaven, and seven times shall pass over thee, till thou know
that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to
whomsoever he will.

4:26 And whereas they commanded to leave the stump of the tree roots;
thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt have known
that the heavens do rule.

4:27 Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and
break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by shewing
mercy to the poor; if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity.

4:28 All this came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar.

4:29 At the end of twelve months he walked in the palace of the
kingdom of Babylon.

4:30 The king spake, and said, Is not this great Babylon, that I have
built for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for
the honour of my majesty?  4:31 While the word was in the king's
mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, saying, O king Nebuchadnezzar,
