for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of
the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They
have their reward.

6:6 But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou
hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy
Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.

6:7 But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for
they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.

6:8 Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what
things ye have need of, before ye ask him.

6:9 After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in
heaven, Hallowed be thy name.

6:10 Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

6:11 Give us this day our daily bread.

6:12 And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

6:13 And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For
thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen.

6:14 For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you: 6:15 But if ye forgive not men their trespasses,
neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.

6:16 Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad
countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto
men to fast. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.

6:17 But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy
face; 6:18 That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father
which is in secret: and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall
reward thee openly.

6:19 Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and
rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: 6:20 But
lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust
doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal: 6:21
For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

6:22 The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light.

6:23 But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of
darkness.

If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness!  6:24 No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate
the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and
despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.

6:25 Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye
shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye
shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than
raiment?  6:26 Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither
do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth
them. Are ye not much better than they?  6:27 Which of you by taking
thought can add one cubit unto his stature?  6:28 And why take ye
thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow;
they toil not, neither do they spin: 6:29 And yet I say unto you, That
even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.

6:30 Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day
is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe
you, O ye of little faith?  6:31 Therefore take no thought, saying,
What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we
be clothed?  6:32 (For after all these things do the Gentiles seek:)
for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these
things.

6:33 But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and
all these things shall be added unto you.

6:34 Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall
take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the
evil thereof.

7:1 Judge not, that ye be not judged.

7:2 For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what
measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.

7:3 And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?  7:4 Or how wilt
thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye;
and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye?  7:5 Thou hypocrite, first
cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see
clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye.

7:6 Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your
pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn
again and rend you.

7:7 Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock,
and it shall be opened unto you: 7:8 For every one that asketh
receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it
shall be opened.

7:9 Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he
give him a stone?  7:10 Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a
serpent?  7:11 If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts
unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven
give good things to them that ask him?  7:12 Therefore all things
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them:
for this is the law and the prophets.

7:13 Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad
is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat: 7:14 Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which
leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.

7:15 Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening wolves.

7:16 Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles?  7:17 Even so every good tree bringeth
forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.

7:18 A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt
tree bring forth good fruit.

7:19 Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and
cast into the fire.

7:20 Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

7:21 Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which
is in heaven.

7:22 Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in
thy name done many wonderful works?  7:23 And then will I profess unto
them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity.

7:24 Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth
them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a
rock: 7:25 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founded
upon a rock.

7:26 And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them
not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon
the sand: 7:27 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the
winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell: and great was the
fall of it.

7:28 And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the
people were astonished at his doctrine: 7:29 For he taught them as one
having authority, and not as the scribes.

8:1 When he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed
him.

8:2 And, behold, there came a leper and worshipped him, saying, Lord,
if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.

8:3 And Jesus put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will; be
thou clean. And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.

8:4 And Jesus saith unto him, See thou tell no man; but go thy way,
shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded,
for a testimony unto them.

8:5 And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a
centurion, beseeching him, 8:6 And saying, Lord, my servant lieth at
home sick of the palsy, grievously tormented.

8:7 And Jesus saith unto him, I will come and heal him.

8:8 The centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou
shouldest come under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant
shall be healed.

8:9 For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me: and I
say to this man, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he
cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it.

8:10 When Jesus heard it, he marvelled, and said to them that
followed, Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no,
not in Israel.

8:11 And I say unto you, That many shall come from the east and west,
and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom
of heaven.

8:12 But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer
darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

8:13 And Jesus said unto the centurion, Go thy way; and as thou hast
believed, so be it done unto thee. And his servant was healed in the
selfsame hour.

8:14 And when Jesus was come into Peter's house, he saw his wife's
mother laid, and sick of a fever.

8:15 And he touched her hand, and the fever left her: and she arose,
and ministered unto them.

8:16 When the even was come, they brought unto him many that were
possessed with devils: and he cast out the spirits with his word, and
healed all that were sick: 8:17 That it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself took our infirmities,
and bare our sicknesses.

8:18 Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave
commandment to depart unto the other side.

8:19 And a certain scribe came, and said unto him, Master, I will
follow thee whithersoever thou goest.

8:20 And Jesus saith unto him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of
the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.

8:21 And another of his disciples said unto him, Lord, suffer me first
to go and bury my father.

8:22 But Jesus said unto him, Follow me; and let the dead bury their
dead.

8:23 And when he was entered into a ship, his disciples followed him.

8:24 And, behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch
that the ship was covered with the waves: but he was asleep.

8:25 And his disciples came to him, and awoke him, saying, Lord, save
us: we perish.

8:26 And he saith unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?
Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a
great calm.

8:27 But the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this, that
even the winds and the sea obey him!  8:28 And when he was come to the
other side into the country of the Gergesenes, there met him two
possessed with devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so
that no man might pass by that way.

8:29 And, behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with
thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us
before the time?  8:30 And there was a good way off from them an herd
of many swine feeding.

8:31 So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer
us to go away into the herd of swine.

8:32 And he said unto them, Go. And when they were come out, they went
into the herd of swine: and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran
violently down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the waters.

8:33 And they that kept them fled, and went their ways into the city,
and told every thing, and what was befallen to the possessed of the
devils.

8:34 And, behold, the whole city came out to meet Jesus: and when they
saw him, they besought him that he would depart out of their coasts.

9:1 And he entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his own
city.

9:2 And, behold, they brought to him a man sick of the palsy, lying on
a bed: and Jesus seeing their faith said unto the sick of the palsy;
Son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee.

9:3 And, behold, certain of the scribes said within themselves, This
man blasphemeth.

9:4 And Jesus knowing their thoughts said, Wherefore think ye evil in
your hearts?  9:5 For whether is easier, to say, Thy sins be forgiven
thee; or to say, Arise, and walk?  9:6 But that ye may know that the
Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (then saith he to the
sick of the palsy,) Arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thine house.

9:7 And he arose, and departed to his house.

9:8 But when the multitudes saw it, they marvelled, and glorified God,
which had given such power unto men.

9:9 And as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man, named
Matthew, sitting at the receipt of custom: and he saith unto him,
Follow me. And he arose, and followed him.

9:10 And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meat in the house, behold,
many publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and his
disciples.

9:11 And when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto his disciples, Why
eateth your Master with publicans and sinners?  9:12 But when Jesus
heard that, he said unto them, They that be whole need not a
physician, but they that are sick.

9:13 But go ye and learn what that meaneth, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance.

9:14 Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the
Pharisees fast oft, but thy disciples fast not?  9:15 And Jesus said
unto them, Can the children of the bridechamber mourn, as long as the
bridegroom is with them? but the days will come, when the bridegroom
shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast.

9:16 No man putteth a piece of new cloth unto an old garment, for that
which is put in to fill it up taketh from the garment, and the rent is
made worse.

9:17 Neither do men put new wine into old bottles: else the bottles
break, and the wine runneth out, and the bottles perish: but they put
new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved.

9:18 While he spake these things unto them, behold, there came a
certain ruler, and worshipped him, saying, My daughter is even now
dead: but come and lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live.

9:19 And Jesus arose, and followed him, and so did his disciples.

9:20 And, behold, a woman, which was diseased with an issue of blood
twelve years, came behind him, and touched the hem of his garment:
9:21 For she said within herself, If I may but touch his garment, I
shall be whole.

9:22 But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said,
Daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith hath made thee whole. And the
woman was made whole from that hour.

9:23 And when Jesus came into the ruler's house, and saw the minstrels
and the people making a noise, 9:24 He said unto them, Give place: for
the maid is not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorn.

9:25 But when the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by
the hand, and the maid arose.

9:26 And the fame hereof went abroad into all that land.

9:27 And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him,
crying, and saying, Thou son of David, have mercy on us.

9:28 And when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him:
and Jesus saith unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? They
said unto him, Yea, Lord.

9:29 Then touched he their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it
unto you.

9:30 And their eyes were opened; and Jesus straitly charged them,
saying, See that no man know it.

9:31 But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all
that country.

9:32 As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man
possessed with a devil.

9:33 And when the devil was cast out, the dumb spake: and the
multitudes marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel.

9:34 But the Pharisees said, He casteth out devils through the prince
of the devils.

9:35 And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in
their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing
every sickness and every disease among the people.

9:36 But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on
them, because they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as sheep having
no shepherd.

9:37 Then saith he unto his disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous,
but the labourers are few; 9:38 Pray ye therefore the Lord of the
harvest, that he will send forth labourers into his harvest.

10:1 And when he had called unto him his twelve disciples, he gave
them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all
manner of sickness and all manner of disease.

10:2 Now the names of the twelve apostles are these; The first, Simon,
who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebedee,
and John his brother; 10:3 Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and
Matthew the publican; James the son of Alphaeus, and Lebbaeus, whose
surname was Thaddaeus; 10:4 Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot,
who also betrayed him.

10:5 These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, Go not
into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans
enter ye not: 10:6 But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel.

10:7 And as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand.

10:8 Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out
devils: freely ye have received, freely give.

10:9 Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses, 10:10
Nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet
staves: for the workman is worthy of his meat.

10:11 And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, enquire who in
it is worthy; and there abide till ye go thence.

10:12 And when ye come into an house, salute it.

10:13 And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if
it be not worthy, let your peace return to you.

10:14 And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when
ye depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet.

10:15 Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land
of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city.

10:16 Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye
therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.

10:17 But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils,
and they will scourge you in their synagogues; 10:18 And ye shall be
brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony
against them and the Gentiles.

10:19 But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye
shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall
speak.

10:20 For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which
speaketh in you.

10:21 And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the
father the child: and the children shall rise up against their
parents, and cause them to be put to death.

10:22 And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake: but he that
endureth to the end shall be saved.

10:23 But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another:
for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of
Israel, till the Son of man be come.

10:24 The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his
lord.

10:25 It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the
servant as his lord. If they have called the master of the house
Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household?  10:26
Fear them not therefore: for there is nothing covered, that shall not
be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known.

10:27 What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light: and what ye
hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the housetops.

10:28 And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill
the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and
body in hell.

10:29 Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall
not fall on the ground without your Father.

10:30 But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.

10:31 Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows.

10:32 Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I
confess also before my Father which is in heaven.

10:33 But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny
before my Father which is in heaven.

10:34 Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to
send peace, but a sword.

10:35 For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and
the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her
mother in law.

10:36 And a man's foes shall be they of his own household.

10:37 He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of
me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of
me.

10:38 And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not
worthy of me.

10:39 He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his
life for my sake shall find it.

10:40 He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me
receiveth him that sent me.

10:41 He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall
receive a prophet's reward; and he that receiveth a righteous man in
the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man's reward.

10:42 And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones
a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto
you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.

11:1 And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding his
twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and to preach in their
cities.

11:2 Now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he
sent two of his disciples, 11:3 And said unto him, Art thou he that
should come, or do we look for another?  11:4 Jesus answered and said
unto them, Go and shew John again those things which ye do hear and
see: 11:5 The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers
are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor
have the gospel preached to them.

11:6 And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me.

11:7 And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes
concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed
shaken with the wind?  11:8 But what went ye out for to see? A man
clothed in soft raiment?  behold, they that wear soft clothing are in
kings' houses.

11:9 But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? yea, I say unto you,
and more than a prophet.

11:10 For this is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my
messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

11:11 Verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women there
hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist: notwithstanding he
that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.

11:12 And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of
heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force.

11:13 For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John.

11:14 And if ye will receive it, this is Elias, which was for to come.

11:15 He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

11:16 But whereunto shall I liken this generation? It is like unto
children sitting in the markets, and calling unto their fellows, 11:17
And saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have
mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented.

11:18 For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He hath
a devil.

11:19 The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a
man gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners.
But wisdom is justified of her children.

11:20 Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty
works were done, because they repented not: 11:21 Woe unto thee,
Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works, which
were done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.

11:22 But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and
Sidon at the day of judgment, than for you.

11:23 And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be
brought down to hell: for if the mighty works, which have been done in
thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day.

11:24 But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land
of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee.

11:25 At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes.

11:26 Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in thy sight.

11:27 All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man
knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father,
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him.

11:28 Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest.

11:29 Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly
in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

11:30 For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

12:1 At that time Jesus went on the sabbath day through the corn; and
his disciples were an hungred, and began to pluck the ears of corn and
to eat.

12:2 But when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto him, Behold, thy
disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the sabbath day.

12:3 But he said unto them, Have ye not read what David did, when he
was an hungred, and they that were with him; 12:4 How he entered into
the house of God, and did eat the shewbread, which was not lawful for
him to eat, neither for them which were with him, but only for the
priests?  12:5 Or have ye not read in the law, how that on the sabbath
days the priests in the temple profane the sabbath, and are blameless?
12:6 But I say unto you, That in this place is one greater than the
temple.

12:7 But if ye had known what this meaneth, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless.

12:8 For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath day.

12:9 And when he was departed thence, he went into their synagogue:
12:10 And, behold, there was a man which had his hand withered. And
they asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days? that
they might accuse him.

12:11 And he said unto them, What man shall there be among you, that
shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day,
will he not lay hold on it, and lift it out?  12:12 How much then is a
man better than a sheep? Wherefore it is lawful to do well on the
sabbath days.

12:13 Then saith he to the man, Stretch forth thine hand. And he
stretched it forth; and it was restored whole, like as the other.

12:14 Then the Pharisees went out, and held a council against him, how
they might destroy him.

12:15 But when Jesus knew it, he withdrew himself from thence: and
great multitudes followed him, and he healed them all; 12:16 And
charged them that they should not make him known: 12:17 That it might
be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, 12:18
Behold my servant, whom I have chosen; my beloved, in whom my soul is
well pleased: I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall shew
judgment to the Gentiles.

12:19 He shall not strive, nor cry; neither shall any man hear his
voice in the streets.

12:20 A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not
quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory.

12:21 And in his name shall the Gentiles trust.

12:22 Then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil, blind, and
dumb: and he healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spake
and saw.

12:23 And all the people were amazed, and said, Is not this the son of
David?  12:24 But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, This fellow
doth not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils.

12:25 And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them, Every kingdom
divided against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or
house divided against itself shall not stand: 12:26 And if Satan cast
out Satan, he is divided against himself; how shall then his kingdom
stand?  12:27 And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your
children cast them out? therefore they shall be your judges.

12:28 But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom
of God is come unto you.

12:29 Or else how can one enter into a strong man's house, and spoil
his goods, except he first bind the strong man? and then he will spoil
his house.

12:30 He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not
with me scattereth abroad.

12:31 Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall
be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall
not be forgiven unto men.

12:32 And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall
be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it
shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world
to come.

12:33 Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make the
tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by his
fruit.

12:34 O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good
things?  for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.

12:35 A good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth
good things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth
evil things.

12:36 But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.

12:37 For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou
shalt be condemned.

12:38 Then certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees answered,
saying, Master, we would see a sign from thee.

12:39 But he answered and said unto them, An evil and adulterous
generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given to
it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas: 12:40 For as Jonas was three
days and three nights in the whale's belly; so shall the Son of man be
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.

12:41 The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this generation,
and shall condemn it: because they repented at the preaching of Jonas;
and, behold, a greater than Jonas is here.

12:42 The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it: for she came from the uttermost
parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, a
greater than Solomon is here.

12:43 When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through
dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none.

12:44 Then he saith, I will return into my house from whence I came
out; and when he is come, he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished.

12:45 Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven other spirits more
wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the last
state of that man is worse than the first. Even so shall it be also
unto this wicked generation.

12:46 While he yet talked to the people, behold, his mother and his
brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him.

12:47 Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren
stand without, desiring to speak with thee.

12:48 But he answered and said unto him that told him, Who is my
mother?  and who are my brethren?  12:49 And he stretched forth his
hand toward his disciples, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren!
12:50 For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven,
the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.

13:1 The same day went Jesus out of the house, and sat by the sea
side.

13:2 And great multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he
went into a ship, and sat; and the whole multitude stood on the shore.

13:3 And he spake many things unto them in parables, saying, Behold, a
sower went forth to sow; 13:4 And when he sowed, some seeds fell by
the way side, and the fowls came and devoured them up: 13:5 Some fell
upon stony places, where they had not much earth: and forthwith they
sprung up, because they had no deepness of earth: 13:6 And when the
sun was up, they were scorched; and because they had no root, they
withered away.

13:7 And some fell among thorns; and the thorns sprung up, and choked
them: 13:8 But other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit,
some an hundredfold, some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold.

13:9 Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.

13:10 And the disciples came, and said unto him, Why speakest thou
unto them in parables?  13:11 He answered and said unto them, Because
it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven,
but to them it is not given.

13:12 For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have
more abundance: but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away
even that he hath.

13:13 Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing see
not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.

13:14 And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which saith, By
hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall
see, and shall not perceive: 13:15 For this people's heart is waxed
gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have
closed; lest at any time they should see with their eyes and hear with
their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them.

13:16 But blessed are your eyes, for they see: and your ears, for they
hear.

13:17 For verily I say unto you, That many prophets and righteous men
have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them;
and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.

13:18 Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower.

13:19 When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth
it not, then cometh the wicked one, and catcheth away that which was
sown in his heart. This is he which received seed by the way side.

13:20 But he that received the seed into stony places, the same is he
that heareth the word, and anon with joy receiveth it; 13:21 Yet hath
he not root in himself, but dureth for a while: for when tribulation
or persecution ariseth because of the word, by and by he is offended.

13:22 He also that received seed among the thorns is he that heareth
the word; and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches,
choke the word, and he becometh unfruitful.

13:23 But he that received seed into the good ground is he that
heareth the word, and understandeth it; which also beareth fruit, and
bringeth forth, some an hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty.

13:24 Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of
heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field: 13:25
But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat,
and went his way.

13:26 But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then
appeared the tares also.

13:27 So the servants of the householder came and said unto him, Sir,
didst not thou sow good seed in thy field? from whence then hath it
tares?  13:28 He said unto them, An enemy hath done this. The servants
said unto him, Wilt thou then that we go and gather them up?  13:29
But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also
the wheat with them.

13:30 Let both grow together until the harvest: and in the time of
harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares,
and bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat into my
barn.

13:31 Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of
heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed
in his field: 13:32 Which indeed is the least of all seeds: but when
it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a tree, so
that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof.

13:33 Another parable spake he unto them; The kingdom of heaven is
like unto leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three measures of
meal, till the whole was leavened.

13:34 All these things spake Jesus unto the multitude in parables; and
without a parable spake he not unto them: 13:35 That it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I will open my
mouth in parables; I will utter things which have been kept secret
from the foundation of the world.

13:36 Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house: and
his disciples came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the parable of
the tares of the field.

13:37 He answered and said unto them, He that soweth the good seed is
the Son of man; 13:38 The field is the world; the good seed are the
children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the wicked
one; 13:39 The enemy that sowed them is the devil; the harvest is the
end of the world; and the reapers are the angels.

13:40 As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so
shall it be in the end of this world.

13:41 The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall
gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do
iniquity; 13:42 And shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there
shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

13:43 Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom
of their Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.

13:44 Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a
field; the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof
goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.

13:45 Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man,
seeking goodly pearls: 13:46 Who, when he had found one pearl of great
price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it.

13:47 Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast
into the sea, and gathered of every kind: 13:48 Which, when it was
full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered the good into
vessels, but cast the bad away.

13:49 So shall it be at the end of the world: the angels shall come
forth, and sever the wicked from among the just, 13:50 And shall cast
them into the furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of
teeth.

13:51 Jesus saith unto them, Have ye understood all these things? They
say unto him, Yea, Lord.

13:52 Then said he unto them, Therefore every scribe which is
instructed unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an
householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and
old.

13:53 And it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these
parables, he departed thence.

13:54 And when he was come into his own country, he taught them in
their synagogue, insomuch that they were astonished, and said, Whence
hath this man this wisdom, and these mighty works?  13:55 Is not this
the carpenter's son? is not his mother called Mary? and his brethren,
James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas?  13:56 And his sisters, are
they not all with us? Whence then hath this man all these things?
13:57 And they were offended in him. But Jesus said unto them, A
prophet is not without honour, save in his own country, and in his own
house.

13:58 And he did not many mighty works there because of their
unbelief.

14:1 At that time Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus, 14:2
And said unto his servants, This is John the Baptist; he is risen from
the dead; and therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him.

14:3 For Herod had laid hold on John, and bound him, and put him in
prison for Herodias' sake, his brother Philip's wife.

14:4 For John said unto him, It is not lawful for thee to have her.

14:5 And when he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude,
because they counted him as a prophet.

14:6 But when Herod's birthday was kept, the daughter of Herodias
danced before them, and pleased Herod.

14:7 Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatsoever she
would ask.

14:8 And she, being before instructed of her mother, said, Give me
here John Baptist's head in a charger.

14:9 And the king was sorry: nevertheless for the oath's sake, and
them which sat with him at meat, he commanded it to be given her.

14:10 And he sent, and beheaded John in the prison.

14:11 And his head was brought in a charger, and given to the damsel:
and she brought it to her mother.

14:12 And his disciples came, and took up the body, and buried it, and
went and told Jesus.

14:13 When Jesus heard of it, he departed thence by ship into a desert
place apart: and when the people had heard thereof, they followed him
on foot out of the cities.

14:14 And Jesus went forth, and saw a great multitude, and was moved
with compassion toward them, and he healed their sick.

14:15 And when it was evening, his disciples came to him, saying, This
is a desert place, and the time is now past; send the multitude away,
that they may go into the villages, and buy themselves victuals.

14:16 But Jesus said unto them, They need not depart; give ye them to
eat.

14:17 And they say unto him, We have here but five loaves, and two
fishes.

14:18 He said, Bring them hither to me.

14:19 And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass, and
took the five loaves, and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he
blessed, and brake, and gave the loaves to his disciples, and the
disciples to the multitude.

14:20 And they did all eat, and were filled: and they took up of the
fragments that remained twelve baskets full.

14:21 And they that had eaten were about five thousand men, beside
women and children.

14:22 And straightway Jesus constrained his disciples to get into a
ship, and to go before him unto the other side, while he sent the
multitudes away.

14:23 And when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into a
mountain apart to pray: and when the evening was come, he was there
alone.

14:24 But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves:
for the wind was contrary.

14:25 And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went unto them,
walking on the sea.

14:26 And when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were
troubled, saying, It is a spirit; and they cried out for fear.

14:27 But straightway Jesus spake unto them, saying, Be of good cheer;
it is I; be not afraid.

14:28 And Peter answered him and said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me
come unto thee on the water.

14:29 And he said, Come. And when Peter was come down out of the ship,
he walked on the water, to go to Jesus.

14:30 But when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and
beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save me.

14:31 And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him,
and said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?
14:32 And when they were come into the ship, the wind ceased.

14:33 Then they that were in the ship came and worshipped him, saying,
Of a truth thou art the Son of God.

14:34 And when they were gone over, they came into the land of
Gennesaret.

14:35 And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent
out into all that country round about, and brought unto him all that
were diseased; 14:36 And besought him that they might only touch the
hem of his garment: and as many as touched were made perfectly whole.
