
24:26 Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the
desert; go not forth: behold, he is in the secret chambers; believe it
not.

24:27 For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even
unto the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.

24:28 For wheresoever the carcase is, there will the eagles be
gathered together.

24:29 Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall
fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken: 24:30
And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then
shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of
man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.

24:31 And he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet,
and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one
end of heaven to the other.

24:32 Now learn a parable of the fig tree; When his branch is yet
tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh: 24:33
So likewise ye, when ye shall see all these things, know that it is
near, even at the doors.

24:34 Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass, till all
these things be fulfilled.

24:35 Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
away.

24:36 But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of
heaven, but my Father only.

24:37 But as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son
of man be.

24:38 For as in the days that were before the flood they were eating
and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe
entered into the ark, 24:39 And knew not until the flood came, and
took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.

24:40 Then shall two be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the
other left.

24:41 Two women shall be grinding at the mill; the one shall be taken,
and the other left.

24:42 Watch therefore: for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come.

24:43 But know this, that if the goodman of the house had known in
what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not
have suffered his house to be broken up.

24:44 Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not
the Son of man cometh.

24:45 Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made
ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season?  24:46
Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so
doing.

24:47 Verily I say unto you, That he shall make him ruler over all his
goods.

24:48 But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord
delayeth his coming; 24:49 And shall begin to smite his
fellowservants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; 24:50 The lord
of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and
in an hour that he is not aware of, 24:51 And shall cut him asunder,
and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

25:1 Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins,
which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom.

25:2 And five of them were wise, and five were foolish.

25:3 They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with
them: 25:4 But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.

25:5 While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.

25:6 And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom
cometh; go ye out to meet him.

25:7 Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.

25:8 And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil; for our
lamps are gone out.

25:9 But the wise answered, saying, Not so; lest there be not enough
for us and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for
yourselves.

25:10 And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that
were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut.

25:11 Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open
to us.

25:12 But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.

25:13 Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour
wherein the Son of man cometh.

25:14 For the kingdom of heaven is as a man travelling into a far
country, who called his own servants, and delivered unto them his
goods.

25:15 And unto one he gave five talents, to another two, and to
another one; to every man according to his several ability; and
straightway took his journey.

25:16 Then he that had received the five talents went and traded with
the same, and made them other five talents.

25:17 And likewise he that had received two, he also gained other two.

25:18 But he that had received one went and digged in the earth, and
hid his lord's money.

25:19 After a long time the lord of those servants cometh, and
reckoneth with them.

25:20 And so he that had received five talents came and brought other
five talents, saying, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me five talents:
behold, I have gained beside them five talents more.

25:21 His lord said unto him, Well done, thou good and faithful
servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee
ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

25:22 He also that had received two talents came and said, Lord, thou
deliveredst unto me two talents: behold, I have gained two other
talents beside them.

25:23 His lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful servant;
thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over
many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

25:24 Then he which had received the one talent came and said, Lord, I
knew thee that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown,
and gathering where thou hast not strawed: 25:25 And I was afraid, and
went and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, there thou hast that is
thine.

25:26 His lord answered and said unto him, Thou wicked and slothful
servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where
I have not strawed: 25:27 Thou oughtest therefore to have put my money
to the exchangers, and then at my coming I should have received mine
own with usury.

25:28 Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which
hath ten talents.

25:29 For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have
abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that
which he hath.

25:30 And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

25:31 When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy
angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: 25:32
And before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate
them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the
goats: 25:33 And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the
goats on the left.

25:34 Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world: 25:35 For I was an hungred, and ye gave me
meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye
took me in: 25:36 Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited
me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

25:37 Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we
thee an hungred, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?  25:38
When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed
thee?  25:39 Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto
thee?  25:40 And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say
unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these
my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

25:41 Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
angels: 25:42 For I was an hungred, and ye gave me no meat: I was
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: 25:43 I was a stranger, and ye took
me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and ye
visited me not.

25:44 Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee
an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in
prison, and did not minister unto thee?  25:45 Then shall he answer
them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one
of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

25:46 And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the
righteous into life eternal.

26:1 And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings,
he said unto his disciples, 26:2 Ye know that after two days is the
feast of the passover, and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified.

26:3 Then assembled together the chief priests, and the scribes, and
the elders of the people, unto the palace of the high priest, who was
called Caiaphas, 26:4 And consulted that they might take Jesus by
subtilty, and kill him.

26:5 But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar
among the people.

26:6 Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
26:7 There came unto him a woman having an alabaster box of very
precious ointment, and poured it on his head, as he sat at meat.

26:8 But when his disciples saw it, they had indignation, saying, To
what purpose is this waste?  26:9 For this ointment might have been
sold for much, and given to the poor.

26:10 When Jesus understood it, he said unto them, Why trouble ye the
woman? for she hath wrought a good work upon me.

26:11 For ye have the poor always with you; but me ye have not always.

26:12 For in that she hath poured this ointment on my body, she did it
for my burial.

26:13 Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached
in the whole world, there shall also this, that this woman hath done,
be told for a memorial of her.

26:14 Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the
chief priests, 26:15 And said unto them, What will ye give me, and I
will deliver him unto you? And they covenanted with him for thirty
pieces of silver.

26:16 And from that time he sought opportunity to betray him.

26:17 Now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples
came to Jesus, saying unto him, Where wilt thou that we prepare for
thee to eat the passover?  26:18 And he said, Go into the city to such
a man, and say unto him, The Master saith, My time is at hand; I will
keep the passover at thy house with my disciples.

26:19 And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them; and they made
ready the passover.

26:20 Now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve.

26:21 And as they did eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of
you shall betray me.

26:22 And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them
to say unto him, Lord, is it I?  26:23 And he answered and said, He
that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me.

26:24 The Son of man goeth as it is written of him: but woe unto that
man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! it had been good for that man
if he had not been born.

26:25 Then Judas, which betrayed him, answered and said, Master, is it
I?  He said unto him, Thou hast said.

26:26 And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and
brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is
my body.

26:27 And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them,
saying, Drink ye all of it; 26:28 For this is my blood of the new
testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.

26:29 But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of
the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's
kingdom.

26:30 And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of
Olives.

26:31 Then saith Jesus unto them, All ye shall be offended because of
me this night: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the
sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad.

26:32 But after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee.

26:33 Peter answered and said unto him, Though all men shall be
offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended.

26:34 Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, That this night,
before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice.

26:35 Peter said unto him, Though I should die with thee, yet will I
not deny thee. Likewise also said all the disciples.

26:36 Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and
saith unto the disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder.

26:37 And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and
began to be sorrowful and very heavy.

26:38 Then saith he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even
unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with me.

26:39 And he went a little farther, and fell on his face, and prayed,
saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me:
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt.

26:40 And he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and
saith unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour?  26:41
Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed
is willing, but the flesh is weak.

26:42 He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my
Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy
will be done.

26:43 And he came and found them asleep again: for their eyes were
heavy.

26:44 And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third
time, saying the same words.

26:45 Then cometh he to his disciples, and saith unto them, Sleep on
now, and take your rest: behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of
man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.

26:46 Rise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that doth betray
me.

26:47 And while he yet spake, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and
with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief
priests and elders of the people.

26:48 Now he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I
shall kiss, that same is he: hold him fast.

26:49 And forthwith he came to Jesus, and said, Hail, master; and
kissed him.

26:50 And Jesus said unto him, Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then
came they, and laid hands on Jesus and took him.

26:51 And, behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched out his
hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest's,
and smote off his ear.

26:52 Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place:
for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword.

26:53 Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall
presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?  26:54 But how
then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?  26:55
In that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes, Are ye come out as
against a thief with swords and staves for to take me? I sat daily
with you teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold on me.

26:56 But all this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might
be fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled.

26:57 And they that had laid hold on Jesus led him away to Caiaphas
the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.

26:58 But Peter followed him afar off unto the high priest's palace,
and went in, and sat with the servants, to see the end.

26:59 Now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council, sought
false witness against Jesus, to put him to death; 26:60 But found
none: yea, though many false witnesses came, yet found they none. At
the last came two false witnesses, 26:61 And said, This fellow said, I
am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days.

26:62 And the high priest arose, and said unto him, Answerest thou
nothing? what is it which these witness against thee?  26:63 But Jesus
held his peace, And the high priest answered and said unto him, I
adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the
Christ, the Son of God.

26:64 Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said: nevertheless I say unto
you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand
of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.

26:65 Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken
blasphemy; what further need have we of witnesses? behold, now ye have
heard his blasphemy.

26:66 What think ye? They answered and said, He is guilty of death.

26:67 Then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him; and others
smote him with the palms of their hands, 26:68 Saying, Prophesy unto
us, thou Christ, Who is he that smote thee?  26:69 Now Peter sat
without in the palace: and a damsel came unto him, saying, Thou also
wast with Jesus of Galilee.

26:70 But he denied before them all, saying, I know not what thou
sayest.

26:71 And when he was gone out into the porch, another maid saw him,
and said unto them that were there, This fellow was also with Jesus of
Nazareth.

26:72 And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man.

26:73 And after a while came unto him they that stood by, and said to
Peter, Surely thou also art one of them; for thy speech bewrayeth
thee.

26:74 Then began he to curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man.
And immediately the cock crew.

26:75 And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, which said unto him,
Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. And he went out, and
wept bitterly.

27:1 When the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of
the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death: 27:2 And
when they had bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to
Pontius Pilate the governor.

27:3 Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was
condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of
silver to the chief priests and elders, 27:4 Saying, I have sinned in
that I have betrayed the innocent blood. And they said, What is that
to us? see thou to that.

27:5 And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and
departed, and went and hanged himself.

27:6 And the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not
lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of
blood.

27:7 And they took counsel, and bought with them the potter's field,
to bury strangers in.

27:8 Wherefore that field was called, The field of blood, unto this
day.

27:9 Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet,
saying, And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him
that was valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value; 27:10
And gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord appointed me.

27:11 And Jesus stood before the governor: and the governor asked him,
saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And Jesus said unto him, Thou
sayest.

27:12 And when he was accused of the chief priests and elders, he
answered nothing.

27:13 Then said Pilate unto him, Hearest thou not how many things they
witness against thee?  27:14 And he answered him to never a word;
insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly.

27:15 Now at that feast the governor was wont to release unto the
people a prisoner, whom they would.

27:16 And they had then a notable prisoner, called Barabbas.

27:17 Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate said unto
them, Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which
is called Christ?  27:18 For he knew that for envy they had delivered
him.

27:19 When he was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto
him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I have
suffered many things this day in a dream because of him.

27:20 But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that
they should ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.

27:21 The governor answered and said unto them, Whether of the twain
will ye that I release unto you? They said, Barabbas.

27:22 Pilate saith unto them, What shall I do then with Jesus which is
called Christ? They all say unto him, Let him be crucified.

27:23 And the governor said, Why, what evil hath he done? But they
cried out the more, saying, Let him be crucified.

27:24 When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a
tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the
multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see
ye to it.

27:25 Then answered all the people, and said, His blood be on us, and
on our children.

27:26 Then released he Barabbas unto them: and when he had scourged
Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified.

27:27 Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common
hall, and gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers.

27:28 And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe.

27:29 And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it upon
his head, and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before
him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!  27:30 And they
spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head.

27:31 And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe off from
him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him.

27:32 And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name:
him they compelled to bear his cross.

27:33 And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to
say, a place of a skull, 27:34 They gave him vinegar to drink mingled
with gall: and when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink.

27:35 And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots:
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, They
parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots.

27:36 And sitting down they watched him there; 27:37 And set up over
his head his accusation written, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

27:38 Then were there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right
hand, and another on the left.

27:39 And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads, 27:40
And saying, Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three
days, save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the
cross.

27:41 Likewise also the chief priests mocking him, with the scribes
and elders, said, 27:42 He saved others; himself he cannot save. If he
be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we
will believe him.

27:43 He trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him:
for he said, I am the Son of God.

27:44 The thieves also, which were crucified with him, cast the same
in his teeth.

27:45 Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land
unto the ninth hour.

27:46 And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying,
Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why hast
thou forsaken me?  27:47 Some of them that stood there, when they
heard that, said, This man calleth for Elias.

27:48 And straightway one of them ran, and took a spunge, and filled
it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink.

27:49 The rest said, Let be, let us see whether Elias will come to
save him.

27:50 Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the
ghost.

27:51 And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the
top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent; 27:52
And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept
arose, 27:53 And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and
went into the holy city, and appeared unto many.

27:54 Now when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching
Jesus, saw the earthquake, and those things that were done, they
feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God.

27:55 And many women were there beholding afar off, which followed
Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him: 27:56 Among which was Mary
Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of
Zebedees children.

27:57 When the even was come, there came a rich man of Arimathaea,
named Joseph, who also himself was Jesus' disciple: 27:58 He went to
Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body
to be delivered.

27:59 And when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean
linen cloth, 27:60 And laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn
out in the rock: and he rolled a great stone to the door of the
sepulchre, and departed.

27:61 And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, sitting over
against the sepulchre.

27:62 Now the next day, that followed the day of the preparation, the
chief priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate, 27:63 Saying,
Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive,
After three days I will rise again.

27:64 Command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the
third day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and
say unto the people, He is risen from the dead: so the last error
shall be worse than the first.

27:65 Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch: go your way, make it as
sure as ye can.

27:66 So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone,
and setting a watch.

28:1 In the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first
day of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the
sepulchre.

28:2 And, behold, there was a great earthquake: for the angel of the
Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from
the door, and sat upon it.

28:3 His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as
snow: 28:4 And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as
dead men.

28:5 And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for
I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified.

28:6 He is not here: for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place
where the Lord lay.

28:7 And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from the
dead; and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye
see him: lo, I have told you.

28:8 And they departed quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great
joy; and did run to bring his disciples word.

28:9 And as they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them,
saying, All hail. And they came and held him by the feet, and
worshipped him.

28:10 Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid: go tell my brethren
that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me.

28:11 Now when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into
the city, and shewed unto the chief priests all the things that were
done.

28:12 And when they were assembled with the elders, and had taken
counsel, they gave large money unto the soldiers, 28:13 Saying, Say
ye, His disciples came by night, and stole him away while we slept.

28:14 And if this come to the governor's ears, we will persuade him,
and secure you.

28:15 So they took the money, and did as they were taught: and this
saying is commonly reported among the Jews until this day.

28:16 Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a
mountain where Jesus had appointed them.

28:17 And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted.

28:18 And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given
unto me in heaven and in earth.

28:19 Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: 28:20
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you:
and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. Amen.




The Gospel According to Saint Mark


1:1 The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God; 1:2
As it is written in the prophets, Behold, I send my messenger before
thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

1:3 The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of
the Lord, make his paths straight.

1:4 John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins.

1:5 And there went out unto him all the land of Judaea, and they of
Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river of Jordan,
confessing their sins.

1:6 And John was clothed with camel's hair, and with a girdle of a
skin about his loins; and he did eat locusts and wild honey; 1:7 And
preached, saying, There cometh one mightier than I after me, the
latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose.

1:8 I indeed have baptized you with water: but he shall baptize you
with the Holy Ghost.

1:9 And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth
of Galilee, and was baptized of John in Jordan.

1:10 And straightway coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens
opened, and the Spirit like a dove descending upon him: 1:11 And there
came a voice from heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased.

1:12 And immediately the spirit driveth him into the wilderness.

1:13 And he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted of Satan;
and was with the wild beasts; and the angels ministered unto him.

1:14 Now after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee,
preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, 1:15 And saying, The time
is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and
believe the gospel.

1:16 Now as he walked by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew
his brother casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers.

1:17 And Jesus said unto them, Come ye after me, and I will make you
to become fishers of men.

1:18 And straightway they forsook their nets, and followed him.

1:19 And when he had gone a little farther thence, he saw James the
son of Zebedee, and John his brother, who also were in the ship
mending their nets.

1:20 And straightway he called them: and they left their father
Zebedee in the ship with the hired servants, and went after him.

1:21 And they went into Capernaum; and straightway on the sabbath day
he entered into the synagogue, and taught.

1:22 And they were astonished at his doctrine: for he taught them as
one that had authority, and not as the scribes.

1:23 And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit;
and he cried out, 1:24 Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with
thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee
who thou art, the Holy One of God.

1:25 And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of
him.

1:26 And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud
voice, he came out of him.

1:27 And they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned among
themselves, saying, What thing is this? what new doctrine is this? for
with authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do
obey him.

1:28 And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region
round about Galilee.

1:29 And forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue, they
entered into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.

1:30 But Simon's wife's mother lay sick of a fever, and anon they tell
him of her.

1:31 And he came and took her by the hand, and lifted her up; and
immediately the fever left her, and she ministered unto them.

1:32 And at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all that
were diseased, and them that were possessed with devils.

1:33 And all the city was gathered together at the door.

1:34 And he healed many that were sick of divers diseases, and cast
out many devils; and suffered not the devils to speak, because they
knew him.

1:35 And in the morning, rising up a great while before day, he went
out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed.

1:36 And Simon and they that were with him followed after him.

1:37 And when they had found him, they said unto him, All men seek for
thee.

1:38 And he said unto them, Let us go into the next towns, that I may
preach there also: for therefore came I forth.

1:39 And he preached in their synagogues throughout all Galilee, and
cast out devils.

1:40 And there came a leper to him, beseeching him, and kneeling down
to him, and saying unto him, If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.

1:41 And Jesus, moved with compassion, put forth his hand, and touched
him, and saith unto him, I will; be thou clean.

1:42 And as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed
from him, and he was cleansed.

1:43 And he straitly charged him, and forthwith sent him away; 1:44
And saith unto him, See thou say nothing to any man: but go thy way,
shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing those things
which Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.

1:45 But he went out, and began to publish it much, and to blaze
abroad the matter, insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into
the city, but was without in desert places: and they came to him from
every quarter.

2:1 And again he entered into Capernaum after some days; and it was
noised that he was in the house.

2:2 And straightway many were gathered together, insomuch that there
was no room to receive them, no, not so much as about the door: and he
preached the word unto them.

2:3 And they come unto him, bringing one sick of the palsy, which was
borne of four.

2:4 And when they could not come nigh unto him for the press, they
uncovered the roof where he was: and when they had broken it up, they
let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay.

2:5 When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsy,
Son, thy sins be forgiven thee.

2:6 But there was certain of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning
in their hearts, 2:7 Why doth this man thus speak blasphemies? who can
forgive sins but God only?  2:8 And immediately when Jesus perceived
in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, he said unto
them, Why reason ye these things in your hearts?  2:9 Whether is it
easier to say to the sick of the palsy, Thy sins be forgiven thee; or
to say, Arise, and take up thy bed, and walk?  2:10 But that ye may
know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (he
saith to the sick of the palsy,) 2:11 I say unto thee, Arise, and take
up thy bed, and go thy way into thine house.

2:12 And immediately he arose, took up the bed, and went forth before
them all; insomuch that they were all amazed, and glorified God,
saying, We never saw it on this fashion.

2:13 And he went forth again by the sea side; and all the multitude
resorted unto him, and he taught them.

2:14 And as he passed by, he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at
the receipt of custom, and said unto him, Follow me. And he arose and
followed him.

2:15 And it came to pass, that, as Jesus sat at meat in his house,
many publicans and sinners sat also together with Jesus and his
disciples: for there were many, and they followed him.

2:16 And when the scribes and Pharisees saw him eat with publicans and
sinners, they said unto his disciples, How is it that he eateth and
drinketh with publicans and sinners?  2:17 When Jesus heard it, he
saith unto them, They that are whole have no need of the physician,
but they that are sick: I came not to call the righteous, but sinners
to repentance.

2:18 And the disciples of John and of the Pharisees used to fast: and
they come and say unto him, Why do the disciples of John and of the
Pharisees fast, but thy disciples fast not?  2:19 And Jesus said unto
them, Can the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom
is with them? as long as they have the bridegroom with them, they
cannot fast.

2:20 But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them, and then shall they fast in those days.

2:21 No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment: else
the new piece that filled it up taketh away from the old, and the rent
is made worse.

2:22 And no man putteth new wine into old bottles: else the new wine
doth burst the bottles, and the wine is spilled, and the bottles will
be marred: but new wine must be put into new bottles.

2:23 And it came to pass, that he went through the corn fields on the
sabbath day; and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears
of corn.

2:24 And the Pharisees said unto him, Behold, why do they on the
sabbath day that which is not lawful?  2:25 And he said unto them,
Have ye never read what David did, when he had need, and was an
hungred, he, and they that were with him?  2:26 How he went into the
house of God in the days of Abiathar the high priest, and did eat the
shewbread, which is not lawful to eat but for the priests, and gave
also to them which were with him?  2:27 And he said unto them, The
sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath: 2:28 Therefore
the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.

3:1 And he entered again into the synagogue; and there was a man there
which had a withered hand.

3:2 And they watched him, whether he would heal him on the sabbath
day; that they might accuse him.

3:3 And he saith unto the man which had the withered hand, Stand
forth.

3:4 And he saith unto them, Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath
days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? But they held their
peace.

3:5 And when he had looked round about on them with anger, being
grieved for the hardness of their hearts, he saith unto the man,
Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched it out: and his hand was
restored whole as the other.

3:6 And the Pharisees went forth, and straightway took counsel with
the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.

3:7 But Jesus withdrew himself with his disciples to the sea: and a
great multitude from Galilee followed him, and from Judaea, 3:8 And
from Jerusalem, and from Idumaea, and from beyond Jordan; and they
about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, when they had heard what
great things he did, came unto him.

3:9 And he spake to his disciples, that a small ship should wait on
him because of the multitude, lest they should throng him.

3:10 For he had healed many; insomuch that they pressed upon him for
to touch him, as many as had plagues.

3:11 And unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him, and
cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God.

3:12 And he straitly charged them that they should not make him known.

3:13 And he goeth up into a mountain, and calleth unto him whom he
would: and they came unto him.

3:14 And he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he
might send them forth to preach, 3:15 And to have power to heal
sicknesses, and to cast out devils: 3:16 And Simon he surnamed Peter;
3:17 And James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and
he surnamed them Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder: 3:18 And
Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and
James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus, and Simon the Canaanite,
3:19 And Judas Iscariot, which also betrayed him: and they went into
an house.

3:20 And the multitude cometh together again, so that they could not
so much as eat bread.

3:21 And when his friends heard of it, they went out to lay hold on
him: for they said, He is beside himself.

3:22 And the scribes which came down from Jerusalem said, He hath
Beelzebub, and by the prince of the devils casteth he out devils.

3:23 And he called them unto him, and said unto them in parables, How
can Satan cast out Satan?  3:24 And if a kingdom be divided against
itself, that kingdom cannot stand.

3:25 And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot
stand.

3:26 And if Satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he cannot
stand, but hath an end.

3:27 No man can enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his goods,
except he will first bind the strong man; and then he will spoil his
house.

3:28 Verily I say unto you, All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons
of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme: 3:29
But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never
forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation.

3:30 Because they said, He hath an unclean spirit.

3:31 There came then his brethren and his mother, and, standing
without, sent unto him, calling him.

3:32 And the multitude sat about him, and they said unto him, Behold,
thy mother and thy brethren without seek for thee.

3:33 And he answered them, saying, Who is my mother, or my brethren?
3:34 And he looked round about on them which sat about him, and said,
Behold my mother and my brethren!  3:35 For whosoever shall do the
will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother.

4:1 And he began again to teach by the sea side: and there was
gathered unto him a great multitude, so that he entered into a ship,
and sat in the sea; and the whole multitude was by the sea on the
land.

4:2 And he taught them many things by parables, and said unto them in
his doctrine, 4:3 Hearken; Behold, there went out a sower to sow: 4:4
And it came to pass, as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and the
fowls of the air came and devoured it up.

4:5 And some fell on stony ground, where it had not much earth; and
immediately it sprang up, because it had no depth of earth: 4:6 But
when the sun was up, it was scorched; and because it had no root, it
withered away.

4:7 And some fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it,
and it yielded no fruit.

4:8 And other fell on good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang up
and increased; and brought forth, some thirty, and some sixty, and
some an hundred.

4:9 And he said unto them, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

4:10 And when he was alone, they that were about him with the twelve
asked of him the parable.

4:11 And he said unto them, Unto you it is given to know the mystery
of the kingdom of God: but unto them that are without, all these
things are done in parables: 4:12 That seeing they may see, and not
