stones, and wounded him in the head, and sent him away shamefully
handled.

12:5 And again he sent another; and him they killed, and many others;
beating some, and killing some.

12:6 Having yet therefore one son, his wellbeloved, he sent him also
last unto them, saying, They will reverence my son.

12:7 But those husbandmen said among themselves, This is the heir;
come, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be our's.

12:8 And they took him, and killed him, and cast him out of the
vineyard.

12:9 What shall therefore the lord of the vineyard do? he will come
and destroy the husbandmen, and will give the vineyard unto others.

12:10 And have ye not read this scripture; The stone which the
builders rejected is become the head of the corner: 12:11 This was the
Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?  12:12 And they sought
to lay hold on him, but feared the people: for they knew that he had
spoken the parable against them: and they left him, and went their
way.

12:13 And they send unto him certain of the Pharisees and of the
Herodians, to catch him in his words.

12:14 And when they were come, they say unto him, Master, we know that
thou art true, and carest for no man: for thou regardest not the
person of men, but teachest the way of God in truth: Is it lawful to
give tribute to Caesar, or not?  12:15 Shall we give, or shall we not
give? But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said unto them, Why tempt ye
me? bring me a penny, that I may see it.

12:16 And they brought it. And he saith unto them, Whose is this image
and superscription? And they said unto him, Caesar's.

12:17 And Jesus answering said unto them, Render to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's. And they
marvelled at him.

12:18 Then come unto him the Sadducees, which say there is no
resurrection; and they asked him, saying, 12:19 Master, Moses wrote
unto us, If a man's brother die, and leave his wife behind him, and
leave no children, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up
seed unto his brother.

12:20 Now there were seven brethren: and the first took a wife, and
dying left no seed.

12:21 And the second took her, and died, neither left he any seed: and
the third likewise.

12:22 And the seven had her, and left no seed: last of all the woman
died also.

12:23 In the resurrection therefore, when they shall rise, whose wife
shall she be of them? for the seven had her to wife.

12:24 And Jesus answering said unto them, Do ye not therefore err,
because ye know not the scriptures, neither the power of God?  12:25
For when they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are
given in marriage; but are as the angels which are in heaven.

12:26 And as touching the dead, that they rise: have ye not read in
the book of Moses, how in the bush God spake unto him, saying, I am
the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?  12:27
He is not the God of the dead, but the God of the living: ye therefore
do greatly err.

12:28 And one of the scribes came, and having heard them reasoning
together, and perceiving that he had answered them well, asked him,
Which is the first commandment of all?  12:29 And Jesus answered him,
The first of all the commandments is, Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God
is one Lord: 12:30 And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength: this is the first commandment.

12:31 And the second is like, namely this, Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself. There is none other commandment greater than
these.

12:32 And the scribe said unto him, Well, Master, thou hast said the
truth: for there is one God; and there is none other but he: 12:33 And
to love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and
with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his
neighbour as himself, is more than all whole burnt offerings and
sacrifices.

12:34 And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto
him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. And no man after that
durst ask him any question.

12:35 And Jesus answered and said, while he taught in the temple, How
say the scribes that Christ is the son of David?  12:36 For David
himself said by the Holy Ghost, The LORD said to my Lord, Sit thou on
my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool.

12:37 David therefore himself calleth him Lord; and whence is he then
his son? And the common people heard him gladly.

12:38 And he said unto them in his doctrine, Beware of the scribes,
which love to go in long clothing, and love salutations in the
marketplaces, 12:39 And the chief seats in the synagogues, and the
uppermost rooms at feasts: 12:40 Which devour widows' houses, and for
a pretence make long prayers: these shall receive greater damnation.

12:41 And Jesus sat over against the treasury, and beheld how the
people cast money into the treasury: and many that were rich cast in
much.

12:42 And there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites,
which make a farthing.

12:43 And he called unto him his disciples, and saith unto them,
Verily I say unto you, That this poor widow hath cast more in, than
all they which have cast into the treasury: 12:44 For all they did
cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did cast in all that
she had, even all her living.

13:1 And as he went out of the temple, one of his disciples saith unto
him, Master, see what manner of stones and what buildings are here!
13:2 And Jesus answering said unto him, Seest thou these great
buildings?  there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall
not be thrown down.

13:3 And as he sat upon the mount of Olives over against the temple,
Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him privately, 13:4 Tell us,
when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign when all these
things shall be fulfilled?  13:5 And Jesus answering them began to
say, Take heed lest any man deceive you: 13:6 For many shall come in
my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many.

13:7 And when ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars, be ye not
troubled: for such things must needs be; but the end shall not be yet.

13:8 For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom: and there shall be earthquakes in divers places, and there
shall be famines and troubles: these are the beginnings of sorrows.

13:9 But take heed to yourselves: for they shall deliver you up to
councils; and in the synagogues ye shall be beaten: and ye shall be
brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony against
them.

13:10 And the gospel must first be published among all nations.

13:11 But when they shall lead you, and deliver you up, take no
thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate: but
whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye: for it is
not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost.

13:12 Now the brother shall betray the brother to death, and the
father the son; and children shall rise up against their parents, and
shall cause them to be put to death.

13:13 And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake: but he that
shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.

13:14 But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of
by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, (let him that
readeth understand,) then let them that be in Judaea flee to the
mountains: 13:15 And let him that is on the housetop not go down into
the house, neither enter therein, to take any thing out of his house:
13:16 And let him that is in the field not turn back again for to take
up his garment.

13:17 But woe to them that are with child, and to them that give suck
in those days!  13:18 And pray ye that your flight be not in the
winter.

13:19 For in those days shall be affliction, such as was not from the
beginning of the creation which God created unto this time, neither
shall be.

13:20 And except that the Lord had shortened those days, no flesh
should be saved: but for the elect's sake, whom he hath chosen, he
hath shortened the days.

13:21 And then if any man shall say to you, Lo, here is Christ; or,
lo, he is there; believe him not: 13:22 For false Christs and false
prophets shall rise, and shall shew signs and wonders, to seduce, if
it were possible, even the elect.

13:23 But take ye heed: behold, I have foretold you all things.

13:24 But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun shall be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, 13:25 And the stars
of heaven shall fall, and the powers that are in heaven shall be
shaken.

13:26 And then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds with
great power and glory.

13:27 And then shall he send his angels, and shall gather together his
elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth to the
uttermost part of heaven.

13:28 Now learn a parable of the fig tree; When her branch is yet
tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is near: 13:29
So ye in like manner, when ye shall see these things come to pass,
know that it is nigh, even at the doors.

13:30 Verily I say unto you, that this generation shall not pass, till
all these things be done.

13:31 Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall not pass
away.

13:32 But of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels
which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father.

13:33 Take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is.

13:34 For the Son of Man is as a man taking a far journey, who left
his house, and gave authority to his servants, and to every man his
work, and commanded the porter to watch.

13:35 Watch ye therefore: for ye know not when the master of the house
cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the
morning: 13:36 Lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping.

13:37 And what I say unto you I say unto all, Watch.

14:1 After two days was the feast of the passover, and of unleavened
bread: and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might
take him by craft, and put him to death.

14:2 But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar of
the people.

14:3 And being in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat
at meat, there came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment of
spikenard very precious; and she brake the box, and poured it on his
head.

14:4 And there were some that had indignation within themselves, and
said, Why was this waste of the ointment made?  14:5 For it might have
been sold for more than three hundred pence, and have been given to
the poor. And they murmured against her.

14:6 And Jesus said, Let her alone; why trouble ye her? she hath
wrought a good work on me.

14:7 For ye have the poor with you always, and whensoever ye will ye
may do them good: but me ye have not always.

14:8 She hath done what she could: she is come aforehand to anoint my
body to the burying.

14:9 Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached
throughout the whole world, this also that she hath done shall be
spoken of for a memorial of her.

14:10 And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went unto the chief
priests, to betray him unto them.

14:11 And when they heard it, they were glad, and promised to give him
money. And he sought how he might conveniently betray him.

14:12 And the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the
passover, his disciples said unto him, Where wilt thou that we go and
prepare that thou mayest eat the passover?  14:13 And he sendeth forth
two of his disciples, and saith unto them, Go ye into the city, and
there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water: follow him.

14:14 And wheresoever he shall go in, say ye to the goodman of the
house, The Master saith, Where is the guestchamber, where I shall eat
the passover with my disciples?  14:15 And he will shew you a large
upper room furnished and prepared: there make ready for us.

14:16 And his disciples went forth, and came into the city, and found
as he had said unto them: and they made ready the passover.

14:17 And in the evening he cometh with the twelve.

14:18 And as they sat and did eat, Jesus said, Verily I say unto you,
One of you which eateth with me shall betray me.

14:19 And they began to be sorrowful, and to say unto him one by one,
Is it I? and another said, Is it I?  14:20 And he answered and said
unto them, It is one of the twelve, that dippeth with me in the dish.

14:21 The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him: but woe to
that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! good were it for that man
if he had never been born.

14:22 And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake
it, and gave to them, and said, Take, eat: this is my body.

14:23 And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to
them: and they all drank of it.

14:24 And he said unto them, This is my blood of the new testament,
which is shed for many.

14:25 Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the
vine, until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God.

14:26 And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of
Olives.

14:27 And Jesus saith unto them, All ye shall be offended because of
me this night: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the
sheep shall be scattered.

14:28 But after that I am risen, I will go before you into Galilee.

14:29 But Peter said unto him, Although all shall be offended, yet
will not I.

14:30 And Jesus saith unto him, Verily I say unto thee, That this day,
even in this night, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me
thrice.

14:31 But he spake the more vehemently, If I should die with thee, I
will not deny thee in any wise. Likewise also said they all.

14:32 And they came to a place which was named Gethsemane: and he
saith to his disciples, Sit ye here, while I shall pray.

14:33 And he taketh with him Peter and James and John, and began to be
sore amazed, and to be very heavy; 14:34 And saith unto them, My soul
is exceeding sorrowful unto death: tarry ye here, and watch.

14:35 And he went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed
that, if it were possible, the hour might pass from him.

14:36 And he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee;
take away this cup from me: nevertheless not what I will, but what
thou wilt.

14:37 And he cometh, and findeth them sleeping, and saith unto Peter,
Simon, sleepest thou? couldest not thou watch one hour?  14:38 Watch
ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptation. The spirit truly is ready,
but the flesh is weak.

14:39 And again he went away, and prayed, and spake the same words.

14:40 And when he returned, he found them asleep again, (for their
eyes were heavy,) neither wist they what to answer him.

14:41 And he cometh the third time, and saith unto them, Sleep on now,
and take your rest: it is enough, the hour is come; behold, the Son of
man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.

14:42 Rise up, let us go; lo, he that betrayeth me is at hand.

14:43 And immediately, while he yet spake, cometh Judas, one of the
twelve, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from
the chief priests and the scribes and the elders.

14:44 And he that betrayed him had given them a token, saying,
Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he; take him, and lead him away
safely.

14:45 And as soon as he was come, he goeth straightway to him, and
saith, Master, master; and kissed him.

14:46 And they laid their hands on him, and took him.

14:47 And one of them that stood by drew a sword, and smote a servant
of the high priest, and cut off his ear.

14:48 And Jesus answered and said unto them, Are ye come out, as
against a thief, with swords and with staves to take me?  14:49 I was
daily with you in the temple teaching, and ye took me not: but the
scriptures must be fulfilled.

14:50 And they all forsook him, and fled.

14:51 And there followed him a certain young man, having a linen cloth
cast about his naked body; and the young men laid hold on him: 14:52
And he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked.

14:53 And they led Jesus away to the high priest: and with him were
assembled all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes.

14:54 And Peter followed him afar off, even into the palace of the
high priest: and he sat with the servants, and warmed himself at the
fire.

14:55 And the chief priests and all the council sought for witness
against Jesus to put him to death; and found none.

14:56 For many bare false witness against him, but their witness
agreed not together.

14:57 And there arose certain, and bare false witness against him,
saying, 14:58 We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is
made with hands, and within three days I will build another made
without hands.

14:59 But neither so did their witness agree together.

14:60 And the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus,
saying, Answerest thou nothing? what is it which these witness against
thee?  14:61 But he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the
high priest asked him, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son
of the Blessed?  14:62 And Jesus said, I am: and ye shall see the Son
of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of
heaven.

14:63 Then the high priest rent his clothes, and saith, What need we
any further witnesses?  14:64 Ye have heard the blasphemy: what think
ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of death.

14:65 And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to
buffet him, and to say unto him, Prophesy: and the servants did strike
him with the palms of their hands.

14:66 And as Peter was beneath in the palace, there cometh one of the
maids of the high priest: 14:67 And when she saw Peter warming
himself, she looked upon him, and said, And thou also wast with Jesus
of Nazareth.

14:68 But he denied, saying, I know not, neither understand I what
thou sayest. And he went out into the porch; and the cock crew.

14:69 And a maid saw him again, and began to say to them that stood
by, This is one of them.

14:70 And he denied it again. And a little after, they that stood by
said again to Peter, Surely thou art one of them: for thou art a
Galilaean, and thy speech agreeth thereto.

14:71 But he began to curse and to swear, saying, I know not this man
of whom ye speak.

14:72 And the second time the cock crew. And Peter called to mind the
word that Jesus said unto him, Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt
deny me thrice. And when he thought thereon, he wept.

15:1 And straightway in the morning the chief priests held a
consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole council, and
bound Jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him to Pilate.

15:2 And Pilate asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he
answering said unto them, Thou sayest it.

15:3 And the chief priests accused him of many things: but he answered
nothing.

15:4 And Pilate asked him again, saying, Answerest thou nothing?
behold how many things they witness against thee.

15:5 But Jesus yet answered nothing; so that Pilate marvelled.

15:6 Now at that feast he released unto them one prisoner, whomsoever
they desired.

15:7 And there was one named Barabbas, which lay bound with them that
had made insurrection with him, who had committed murder in the
insurrection.

15:8 And the multitude crying aloud began to desire him to do as he
had ever done unto them.

15:9 But Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye that I release unto you
the King of the Jews?  15:10 For he knew that the chief priests had
delivered him for envy.

15:11 But the chief priests moved the people, that he should rather
release Barabbas unto them.

15:12 And Pilate answered and said again unto them, What will ye then
that I shall do unto him whom ye call the King of the Jews?  15:13 And
they cried out again, Crucify him.

15:14 Then Pilate said unto them, Why, what evil hath he done? And
they cried out the more exceedingly, Crucify him.

15:15 And so Pilate, willing to content the people, released Barabbas
unto them, and delivered Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be
crucified.

15:16 And the soldiers led him away into the hall, called Praetorium;
and they call together the whole band.

15:17 And they clothed him with purple, and platted a crown of thorns,
and put it about his head, 15:18 And began to salute him, Hail, King
of the Jews!  15:19 And they smote him on the head with a reed, and
did spit upon him, and bowing their knees worshipped him.

15:20 And when they had mocked him, they took off the purple from him,
and put his own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him.

15:21 And they compel one Simon a Cyrenian, who passed by, coming out
of the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to bear his cross.

15:22 And they bring him unto the place Golgotha, which is, being
interpreted, The place of a skull.

15:23 And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh: but he
received it not.

15:24 And when they had crucified him, they parted his garments,
casting lots upon them, what every man should take.

15:25 And it was the third hour, and they crucified him.

15:26 And the superscription of his accusation was written over, THE
KING OF THE JEWS.

15:27 And with him they crucify two thieves; the one on his right
hand, and the other on his left.

15:28 And the scripture was fulfilled, which saith, And he was
numbered with the transgressors.

15:29 And they that passed by railed on him, wagging their heads, and
saying, Ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three
days, 15:30 Save thyself, and come down from the cross.

15:31 Likewise also the chief priests mocking said among themselves
with the scribes, He saved others; himself he cannot save.

15:32 Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross, that
we may see and believe. And they that were crucified with him reviled
him.

15:33 And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the
whole land until the ninth hour.

15:34 And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying,
Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted, My God, my
God, why hast thou forsaken me?  15:35 And some of them that stood by,
when they heard it, said, Behold, he calleth Elias.

15:36 And one ran and filled a spunge full of vinegar, and put it on a
reed, and gave him to drink, saying, Let alone; let us see whether
Elias will come to take him down.

15:37 And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost.

15:38 And the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the
bottom.

15:39 And when the centurion, which stood over against him, saw that
he so cried out, and gave up the ghost, he said, Truly this man was
the Son of God.

15:40 There were also women looking on afar off: among whom was Mary
Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses, and
Salome; 15:41 (Who also, when he was in Galilee, followed him, and
ministered unto him;) and many other women which came up with him unto
Jerusalem.

15:42 And now when the even was come, because it was the preparation,
that is, the day before the sabbath, 15:43 Joseph of Arimathaea, an
honourable counsellor, which also waited for the kingdom of God, came,
and went in boldly unto Pilate, and craved the body of Jesus.

15:44 And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead: and calling unto
him the centurion, he asked him whether he had been any while dead.

15:45 And when he knew it of the centurion, he gave the body to
Joseph.

15:46 And he bought fine linen, and took him down, and wrapped him in
the linen, and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn out of a rock,
and rolled a stone unto the door of the sepulchre.

15:47 And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses beheld where he
was laid.

16:1 And when the sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the
mother of James, and Salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might
come and anoint him.

16:2 And very early in the morning the first day of the week, they
came unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun.

16:3 And they said among themselves, Who shall roll us away the stone
from the door of the sepulchre?  16:4 And when they looked, they saw
that the stone was rolled away: for it was very great.

16:5 And entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on
the right side, clothed in a long white garment; and they were
affrighted.

16:6 And he saith unto them, Be not affrighted: Ye seek Jesus of
Nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the
place where they laid him.

16:7 But go your way, tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth
before you into Galilee: there shall ye see him, as he said unto you.

16:8 And they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre; for they
trembled and were amazed: neither said they any thing to any man; for
they were afraid.

16:9 Now when Jesus was risen early the first day of the week, he
appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven
devils.

16:10 And she went and told them that had been with him, as they
mourned and wept.

16:11 And they, when they had heard that he was alive, and had been
seen of her, believed not.

16:12 After that he appeared in another form unto two of them, as they
walked, and went into the country.

16:13 And they went and told it unto the residue: neither believed
they them.

16:14 Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and
upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they
believed not them which had seen him after he was risen.

16:15 And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the
gospel to every creature.

16:16 He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that
believeth not shall be damned.

16:17 And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall
they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; 16:18 They
shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall
not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall
recover.

16:19 So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up
into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.

16:20 And they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working
with them, and confirming the word with signs following. Amen.



The Gospel According to Saint Luke


1:1 Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a
declaration of those things which are most surely believed among us,
1:2 Even as they delivered them unto us, which from the beginning were
eyewitnesses, and ministers of the word; 1:3 It seemed good to me
also, having had perfect understanding of all things from the very
first, to write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus, 1:4
That thou mightest know the certainty of those things, wherein thou
hast been instructed.

1:5 THERE was in the days of Herod, the king of Judaea, a certain
priest named Zacharias, of the course of Abia: and his wife was of the
daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elisabeth.

1:6 And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless.

1:7 And they had no child, because that Elisabeth was barren, and they
both were now well stricken in years.

1:8 And it came to pass, that while he executed the priest's office
before God in the order of his course, 1:9 According to the custom of
the priest's office, his lot was to burn incense when he went into the
temple of the Lord.

1:10 And the whole multitude of the people were praying without at the
time of incense.

1:11 And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing on the
right side of the altar of incense.

1:12 And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear fell upon
him.

1:13 But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias: for thy prayer
is heard; and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt
call his name John.

1:14 And thou shalt have joy and gladness; and many shall rejoice at
his birth.

1:15 For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink
neither wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy
Ghost, even from his mother's womb.

1:16 And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord
their God.

1:17 And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to
turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to
the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.

1:18 And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this? for
I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years.

1:19 And the angel answering said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand
in the presence of God; and am sent to speak unto thee, and to shew
thee these glad tidings.

1:20 And, behold, thou shalt be dumb, and not able to speak, until the
day that these things shall be performed, because thou believest not
my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season.

1:21 And the people waited for Zacharias, and marvelled that he
tarried so long in the temple.

1:22 And when he came out, he could not speak unto them: and they
perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple: for he beckoned
unto them, and remained speechless.

1:23 And it came to pass, that, as soon as the days of his
ministration were accomplished, he departed to his own house.

1:24 And after those days his wife Elisabeth conceived, and hid
herself five months, saying, 1:25 Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in
the days wherein he looked on me, to take away my reproach among men.

1:26 And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a
city of Galilee, named Nazareth, 1:27 To a virgin espoused to a man
whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's name
was Mary.

1:28 And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art
highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women.

1:29 And when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in
her mind what manner of salutation this should be.

1:30 And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found
favour with God.

1:31 And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a
son, and shalt call his name JESUS.

1:32 He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest:
and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David:
1:33 And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his
kingdom there shall be no end.

1:34 Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know
not a man?  1:35 And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of
thee shall be called the Son of God.

1:36 And, behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath also conceived a son
in her old age: and this is the sixth month with her, who was called
barren.

1:37 For with God nothing shall be impossible.

1:38 And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me
according to thy word. And the angel departed from her.

1:39 And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill country with
haste, into a city of Juda; 1:40 And entered into the house of
Zacharias, and saluted Elisabeth.

1:41 And it came to pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of
Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the
Holy Ghost: 1:42 And she spake out with a loud voice, and said,
Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb.

1:43 And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come
to me?  1:44 For, lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded
in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy.

1:45 And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a
performance of those things which were told her from the Lord.

1:46 And Mary said, My soul doth magnify the Lord, 1:47 And my spirit
hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.

1:48 For he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden: for,
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

1:49 For he that is mighty hath done to me great things; and holy is
his name.

1:50 And his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to
generation.

1:51 He hath shewed strength with his arm; he hath scattered the proud
in the imagination of their hearts.

1:52 He hath put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of
low degree.

1:53 He hath filled the hungry with good things; and the rich he hath
sent empty away.

1:54 He hath holpen his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy;
1:55 As he spake to our fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever.

1:56 And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her
own house.

1:57 Now Elisabeth's full time came that she should be delivered; and
she brought forth a son.

1:58 And her neighbours and her cousins heard how the Lord had shewed
great mercy upon her; and they rejoiced with her.

1:59 And it came to pass, that on the eighth day they came to
circumcise the child; and they called him Zacharias, after the name of
his father.

1:60 And his mother answered and said, Not so; but he shall be called
John.

1:61 And they said unto her, There is none of thy kindred that is
called by this name.

1:62 And they made signs to his father, how he would have him called.

1:63 And he asked for a writing table, and wrote, saying, His name is
John. And they marvelled all.

1:64 And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue loosed, and
he spake, and praised God.

1:65 And fear came on all that dwelt round about them: and all these
sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of Judaea.

1:66 And all they that heard them laid them up in their hearts,
saying, What manner of child shall this be! And the hand of the Lord
was with him.

1:67 And his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Ghost, and
prophesied, saying, 1:68 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for he
hath visited and redeemed his people, 1:69 And hath raised up an horn
of salvation for us in the house of his servant David; 1:70 As he
spake by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been since the
world began: 1:71 That we should be saved from our enemies, and from
the hand of all that hate us; 1:72 To perform the mercy promised to
our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant; 1:73 The oath which he
sware to our father Abraham, 1:74 That he would grant unto us, that we
being delivered out of the hand of our enemies might serve him without
fear, 1:75 In holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of
our life.

1:76 And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest: for
thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways; 1:77 To
give knowledge of salvation unto his people by the remission of their
sins, 1:78 Through the tender mercy of our God; whereby the dayspring
from on high hath visited us, 1:79 To give light to them that sit in
darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of
peace.

1:80 And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the
deserts till the day of his shewing unto Israel.

2:1 And it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree
from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be taxed.

2:2 (And this taxing was first made when Cyrenius was governor of
Syria.)  2:3 And all went to be taxed, every one into his own city.

2:4 And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth,
into Judaea, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem;
(because he was of the house and lineage of David:) 2:5 To be taxed
with Mary his espoused wife, being great with child.

2:6 And so it was, that, while they were there, the days were
accomplished that she should be delivered.

2:7 And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in
swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room
for them in the inn.

2:8 And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field,
keeping watch over their flock by night.

2:9 And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of
the Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid.

2:10 And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you
good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people.

2:11 For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour,
which is Christ the Lord.

2:12 And this shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped
in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger.

2:13 And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly
host praising God, and saying, 2:14 Glory to God in the highest, and
on earth peace, good will toward men.

2:15 And it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into
heaven, the shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto
Bethlehem, and see this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord
hath made known unto us.

2:16 And they came with haste, and found Mary, and Joseph, and the
babe lying in a manger.

2:17 And when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying
which was told them concerning this child.

2:18 And all they that heard it wondered at those things which were
told them by the shepherds.

2:19 But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart.

2:20 And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all
the things that they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them.

2:21 And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the
child, his name was called JESUS, which was so named of the angel
before he was conceived in the womb.

2:22 And when the days of her purification according to the law of
Moses were accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him
to the Lord; 2:23 (As it is written in the law of the LORD, Every male
that openeth the womb shall be called holy to the Lord;) 2:24 And to
offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the
Lord, A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons.

2:25 And, behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon;
and the same man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of
Israel: and the Holy Ghost was upon him.

2:26 And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should
not see death, before he had seen the Lord's Christ.

2:27 And he came by the Spirit into the temple: and when the parents
brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the law,
2:28 Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God, and said, 2:29
Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy
word: 2:30 For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, 2:31 Which thou hast
prepared before the face of all people; 2:32 A light to lighten the
Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.

2:33 And Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were
spoken of him.

2:34 And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold,
this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and
for a sign which shall be spoken against; 2:35 (Yea, a sword shall
pierce through thy own soul also,) that the thoughts of many hearts
may be revealed.

2:36 And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of
the tribe of Aser: she was of a great age, and had lived with an
husband seven years from her virginity; 2:37 And she was a widow of
about fourscore and four years, which departed not from the temple,
but served God with fastings and prayers night and day.

2:38 And she coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the
Lord, and spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in
Jerusalem.

2:39 And when they had performed all things according to the law of
the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own city Nazareth.

2:40 And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with
wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him.

2:41 Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the
passover.

2:42 And when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after
the custom of the feast.

2:43 And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the child
Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem; and Joseph and his mother knew not
of it.

2:44 But they, supposing him to have been in the company, went a day's
journey; and they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance.

2:45 And when they found him not, they turned back again to Jerusalem,
seeking him.

2:46 And it came to pass, that after three days they found him in the
temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and
asking them questions.

2:47 And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and
answers.

2:48 And when they saw him, they were amazed: and his mother said unto
him, Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I
have sought thee sorrowing.

2:49 And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not
that I must be about my Father's business?  2:50 And they understood
not the saying which he spake unto them.

2:51 And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject
unto them: but his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.

2:52 And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God
and man.

3:1 Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius
Pilate being governor of Judaea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee,
and his brother Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and of the region of
Trachonitis, and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene, 3:2 Annas and
Caiaphas being the high priests, the word of God came unto John the
son of Zacharias in the wilderness.

3:3 And he came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the
baptism of repentance for the remission of sins; 3:4 As it is written
