in the book of the words of Esaias the prophet, saying, The voice of
one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his
paths straight.

3:5 Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be
brought low; and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough
ways shall be made smooth; 3:6 And all flesh shall see the salvation
of God.

3:7 Then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of
him, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the
wrath to come?  3:8 Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance,
and begin not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father:
for I say unto you, That God is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham.

3:9 And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees: every
tree therefore which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and
cast into the fire.

3:10 And the people asked him, saying, What shall we do then?  3:11 He
answereth and saith unto them, He that hath two coats, let him impart
to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do likewise.

3:12 Then came also publicans to be baptized, and said unto him,
Master, what shall we do?  3:13 And he said unto them, Exact no more
than that which is appointed you.

3:14 And the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall
we do? And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse
any falsely; and be content with your wages.

3:15 And as the people were in expectation, and all men mused in their
hearts of John, whether he were the Christ, or not; 3:16 John
answered, saying unto them all, I indeed baptize you with water; but
one mightier than I cometh, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy
to unloose: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire:
3:17 Whose fan is in his hand, and he will throughly purge his floor,
and will gather the wheat into his garner; but the chaff he will burn
with fire unquenchable.

3:18 And many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the
people.

3:19 But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him for Herodias his
brother Philip's wife, and for all the evils which Herod had done,
3:20 Added yet this above all, that he shut up John in prison.

3:21 Now when all the people were baptized, it came to pass, that
Jesus also being baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened, 3:22
And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him,
and a voice came from heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son; in
thee I am well pleased.

3:23 And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age, being
(as was supposed) the son of Joseph, which was the son of Heli, 3:24
Which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi, which was the
son of Melchi, which was the son of Janna, which was the son of
Joseph, 3:25 Which was the son of Mattathias, which was the son of
Amos, which was the son of Naum, which was the son of Esli, which was
the son of Nagge, 3:26 Which was the son of Maath, which was the son
of Mattathias, which was the son of Semei, which was the son of
Joseph, which was the son of Juda, 3:27 Which was the son of Joanna,
which was the son of Rhesa, which was the son of Zorobabel, which was
the son of Salathiel, which was the son of Neri, 3:28 Which was the
son of Melchi, which was the son of Addi, which was the son of Cosam,
which was the son of Elmodam, which was the son of Er, 3:29 Which was
the son of Jose, which was the son of Eliezer, which was the son of
Jorim, which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi, 3:30
Which was the son of Simeon, which was the son of Juda, which was the
son of Joseph, which was the son of Jonan, which was the son of
Eliakim, 3:31 Which was the son of Melea, which was the son of Menan,
which was the son of Mattatha, which was the son of Nathan, which was
the son of David, 3:32 Which was the son of Jesse, which was the son
of Obed, which was the son of Booz, which was the son of Salmon, which
was the son of Naasson, 3:33 Which was the son of Aminadab, which was
the son of Aram, which was the son of Esrom, which was the son of
Phares, which was the son of Juda, 3:34 Which was the son of Jacob,
which was the son of Isaac, which was the son of Abraham, which was
the son of Thara, which was the son of Nachor, 3:35 Which was the son
of Saruch, which was the son of Ragau, which was the son of Phalec,
which was the son of Heber, which was the son of Sala, 3:36 Which was
the son of Cainan, which was the son of Arphaxad, which was the son of
Sem, which was the son of Noe, which was the son of Lamech, 3:37 Which
was the son of Mathusala, which was the son of Enoch, which was the
son of Jared, which was the son of Maleleel, which was the son of
Cainan, 3:38 Which was the son of Enos, which was the son of Seth,
which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God.

4:1 And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan, and
was led by the Spirit into the wilderness, 4:2 Being forty days
tempted of the devil. And in those days he did eat nothing: and when
they were ended, he afterward hungered.

4:3 And the devil said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, command
this stone that it be made bread.

4:4 And Jesus answered him, saying, It is written, That man shall not
live by bread alone, but by every word of God.

4:5 And the devil, taking him up into an high mountain, shewed unto
him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.

4:6 And the devil said unto him, All this power will I give thee, and
the glory of them: for that is delivered unto me; and to whomsoever I
will I give it.

4:7 If thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine.

4:8 And Jesus answered and said unto him, Get thee behind me, Satan:
for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shalt thou serve.

4:9 And he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on a pinnacle of the
temple, and said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself
down from hence: 4:10 For it is written, He shall give his angels
charge over thee, to keep thee: 4:11 And in their hands they shall
bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.

4:12 And Jesus answering said unto him, It is said, Thou shalt not
tempt the Lord thy God.

4:13 And when the devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from
him for a season.

4:14 And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee: and
there went out a fame of him through all the region round about.

4:15 And he taught in their synagogues, being glorified of all.

4:16 And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up: and, as
his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and
stood up for to read.

4:17 And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias.
And when he had opened the book, he found the place where it was
written, 4:18 The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath
anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal
the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are
bruised, 4:19 To preach the acceptable year of the Lord.

4:20 And he closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and
sat down. And the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were
fastened on him.

4:21 And he began to say unto them, This day is this scripture
fulfilled in your ears.

4:22 And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words
which proceeded out of his mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph's
son?  4:23 And he said unto them, Ye will surely say unto me this
proverb, Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in
Capernaum, do also here in thy country.

4:24 And he said, Verily I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his
own country.

4:25 But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days
of Elias, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when
great famine was throughout all the land; 4:26 But unto none of them
was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that
was a widow.

4:27 And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the
prophet; and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian.

4:28 And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were
filled with wrath, 4:29 And rose up, and thrust him out of the city,
and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built,
that they might cast him down headlong.

4:30 But he passing through the midst of them went his way, 4:31 And
came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught them on the
sabbath days.

4:32 And they were astonished at his doctrine: for his word was with
power.

4:33 And in the synagogue there was a man, which had a spirit of an
unclean devil, and cried out with a loud voice, 4:34 Saying, Let us
alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou
come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art; the Holy One of God.

4:35 And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of
him.

And when the devil had thrown him in the midst, he came out of him,
and hurt him not.

4:36 And they were all amazed, and spake among themselves, saying,
What a word is this! for with authority and power he commandeth the
unclean spirits, and they come out.

4:37 And the fame of him went out into every place of the country
round about.

4:38 And he arose out of the synagogue, and entered into Simon's
house.

And Simon's wife's mother was taken with a great fever; and they
besought him for her.

4:39 And he stood over her, and rebuked the fever; and it left her:
and immediately she arose and ministered unto them.

4:40 Now when the sun was setting, all they that had any sick with
divers diseases brought them unto him; and he laid his hands on every
one of them, and healed them.

4:41 And devils also came out of many, crying out, and saying, Thou
art Christ the Son of God. And he rebuking them suffered them not to
speak: for they knew that he was Christ.

4:42 And when it was day, he departed and went into a desert place:
and the people sought him, and came unto him, and stayed him, that he
should not depart from them.

4:43 And he said unto them, I must preach the kingdom of God to other
cities also: for therefore am I sent.

4:44 And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee.

5:1 And it came to pass, that, as the people pressed upon him to hear
the word of God, he stood by the lake of Gennesaret, 5:2 And saw two
ships standing by the lake: but the fishermen were gone out of them,
and were washing their nets.

5:3 And he entered into one of the ships, which was Simon's, and
prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the land. And he sat
down, and taught the people out of the ship.

5:4 Now when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon, Launch out into
the deep, and let down your nets for a draught.

5:5 And Simon answering said unto him, Master, we have toiled all the
night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy word I will let
down the net.

5:6 And when they had this done, they inclosed a great multitude of
fishes: and their net brake.

5:7 And they beckoned unto their partners, which were in the other
ship, that they should come and help them. And they came, and filled
both the ships, so that they began to sink.

5:8 When Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus' knees, saying,
Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord.

5:9 For he was astonished, and all that were with him, at the draught
of the fishes which they had taken: 5:10 And so was also James, and
John, the sons of Zebedee, which were partners with Simon. And Jesus
said unto Simon, Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men.

5:11 And when they had brought their ships to land, they forsook all,
and followed him.

5:12 And it came to pass, when he was in a certain city, behold a man
full of leprosy: who seeing Jesus fell on his face, and besought him,
saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.

5:13 And he put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will: be
thou clean. And immediately the leprosy departed from him.

5:14 And he charged him to tell no man: but go, and shew thyself to
the priest, and offer for thy cleansing, according as Moses commanded,
for a testimony unto them.

5:15 But so much the more went there a fame abroad of him: and great
multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed by him of their
infirmities.

5:16 And he withdrew himself into the wilderness, and prayed.

5:17 And it came to pass on a certain day, as he was teaching, that
there were Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by, which were
come out of every town of Galilee, and Judaea, and Jerusalem: and the
power of the Lord was present to heal them.

5:18 And, behold, men brought in a bed a man which was taken with a
palsy: and they sought means to bring him in, and to lay him before
him.

5:19 And when they could not find by what way they might bring him in
because of the multitude, they went upon the housetop, and let him
down through the tiling with his couch into the midst before Jesus.

5:20 And when he saw their faith, he said unto him, Man, thy sins are
forgiven thee.

5:21 And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is
this which speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?
5:22 But when Jesus perceived their thoughts, he answering said unto
them, What reason ye in your hearts?  5:23 Whether is easier, to say,
Thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Rise up and walk?  5:24 But that
ye may know that the Son of man hath power upon earth to forgive sins,
(he said unto the sick of the palsy,) I say unto thee, Arise, and take
up thy couch, and go into thine house.

5:25 And immediately he rose up before them, and took up that whereon
he lay, and departed to his own house, glorifying God.

5:26 And they were all amazed, and they glorified God, and were filled
with fear, saying, We have seen strange things to day.

5:27 And after these things he went forth, and saw a publican, named
Levi, sitting at the receipt of custom: and he said unto him, Follow
me.

5:28 And he left all, rose up, and followed him.

5:29 And Levi made him a great feast in his own house: and there was a
great company of publicans and of others that sat down with them.

5:30 But their scribes and Pharisees murmured against his disciples,
saying, Why do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners?  5:31 And
Jesus answering said unto them, They that are whole need not a
physician; but they that are sick.

5:32 I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

5:33 And they said unto him, Why do the disciples of John fast often,
and make prayers, and likewise the disciples of the Pharisees; but
thine eat and drink?  5:34 And he said unto them, Can ye make the
children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them?
5:35 But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them, and then shall they fast in those days.

5:36 And he spake also a parable unto them; No man putteth a piece of
a new garment upon an old; if otherwise, then both the new maketh a
rent, and the piece that was taken out of the new agreeth not with the
old.

5:37 And no man putteth new wine into old bottles; else the new wine
will burst the bottles, and be spilled, and the bottles shall perish.

5:38 But new wine must be put into new bottles; and both are
preserved.

5:39 No man also having drunk old wine straightway desireth new: for
he saith, The old is better.

6:1 And it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first, that he
went through the corn fields; and his disciples plucked the ears of
corn, and did eat, rubbing them in their hands.

6:2 And certain of the Pharisees said unto them, Why do ye that which
is not lawful to do on the sabbath days?  6:3 And Jesus answering them
said, Have ye not read so much as this, what David did, when himself
was an hungred, and they which were with him; 6:4 How he went into the
house of God, and did take and eat the shewbread, and gave also to
them that were with him; which it is not lawful to eat but for the
priests alone?  6:5 And he said unto them, That the Son of man is Lord
also of the sabbath.

6:6 And it came to pass also on another sabbath, that he entered into
the synagogue and taught: and there was a man whose right hand was
withered.

6:7 And the scribes and Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal
on the sabbath day; that they might find an accusation against him.

6:8 But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man which had the
withered hand, Rise up, and stand forth in the midst. And he arose and
stood forth.

6:9 Then said Jesus unto them, I will ask you one thing; Is it lawful
on the sabbath days to do good, or to do evil? to save life, or to
destroy it?  6:10 And looking round about upon them all, he said unto
the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he did so: and his hand was
restored whole as the other.

6:11 And they were filled with madness; and communed one with another
what they might do to Jesus.

6:12 And it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a
mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God.

6:13 And when it was day, he called unto him his disciples: and of
them he chose twelve, whom also he named apostles; 6:14 Simon, (whom
he also named Peter,) and Andrew his brother, James and John, Philip
and Bartholomew, 6:15 Matthew and Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus,
and Simon called Zelotes, 6:16 And Judas the brother of James, and
Judas Iscariot, which also was the traitor.

6:17 And he came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the
company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all
Judaea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, which
came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; 6:18 And they
that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed.

6:19 And the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went
virtue out of him, and healed them all.

6:20 And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, Blessed be
ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God.

6:21 Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed
are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh.

6:22 Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall
separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out
your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake.

6:23 Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your
reward is great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers
unto the prophets.

6:24 But woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your
consolation.

6:25 Woe unto you that are full! for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you
that laugh now! for ye shall mourn and weep.

6:26 Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you! for so did
their fathers to the false prophets.

6:27 But I say unto you which hear, Love your enemies, do good to them
which hate you, 6:28 Bless them that curse you, and pray for them
which despitefully use you.

6:29 And unto him that smiteth thee on the one cheek offer also the
other; and him that taketh away thy cloak forbid not to take thy coat
also.

6:30 Give to every man that asketh of thee; and of him that taketh
away thy goods ask them not again.

6:31 And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them
likewise.

6:32 For if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? for
sinners also love those that love them.

6:33 And if ye do good to them which do good to you, what thank have
ye?  for sinners also do even the same.

6:34 And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank
have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as much again.

6:35 But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for
nothing again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the
children of the Highest: for he is kind unto the unthankful and to the
evil.

6:36 Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful.

6:37 Judge not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall
not be condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: 6:38 Give, and it
shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken
together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. For with
the same measure that ye mete withal it shall be measured to you
again.

6:39 And he spake a parable unto them, Can the blind lead the blind?
shall they not both fall into the ditch?  6:40 The disciple is not
above his master: but every one that is perfect shall be as his
master.

6:41 And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but
perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye?  6:42 Either how
canst thou say to thy brother, Brother, let me pull out the mote that
is in thine eye, when thou thyself beholdest not the beam that is in
thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thine
own eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to pull out the mote that is
in thy brother's eye.

6:43 For a good tree bringeth not forth corrupt fruit; neither doth a
corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.

6:44 For every tree is known by his own fruit. For of thorns men do
not gather figs, nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes.

6:45 A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth
that which is good; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his
heart bringeth forth that which is evil: for of the abundance of the
heart his mouth speaketh.

6:46 And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I
say?  6:47 Whosoever cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doeth
them, I will shew you to whom he is like: 6:48 He is like a man which
built an house, and digged deep, and laid the foundation on a rock:
and when the flood arose, the stream beat vehemently upon that house,
and could not shake it: for it was founded upon a rock.

6:49 But he that heareth, and doeth not, is like a man that without a
foundation built an house upon the earth; against which the stream did
beat vehemently, and immediately it fell; and the ruin of that house
was great.

7:1 Now when he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the
people, he entered into Capernaum.

7:2 And a certain centurion's servant, who was dear unto him, was
sick, and ready to die.

7:3 And when he heard of Jesus, he sent unto him the elders of the
Jews, beseeching him that he would come and heal his servant.

7:4 And when they came to Jesus, they besought him instantly, saying,
That he was worthy for whom he should do this: 7:5 For he loveth our
nation, and he hath built us a synagogue.

7:6 Then Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far from the
house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying unto him, Lord,
trouble not thyself: for I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter
under my roof: 7:7 Wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come
unto thee: but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed.

7:8 For I also am a man set under authority, having under me soldiers,
and I say unto one, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he
cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it.

7:9 When Jesus heard these things, he marvelled at him, and turned him
about, and said unto the people that followed him, I say unto you, I
have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.

7:10 And they that were sent, returning to the house, found the
servant whole that had been sick.

7:11 And it came to pass the day after, that he went into a city
called Nain; and many of his disciples went with him, and much people.

7:12 Now when he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold, there was
a dead man carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a
widow: and much people of the city was with her.

7:13 And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said
unto her, Weep not.

7:14 And he came and touched the bier: and they that bare him stood
still.

And he said, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise.

7:15 And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. And he delivered
him to his mother.

7:16 And there came a fear on all: and they glorified God, saying,
That a great prophet is risen up among us; and, That God hath visited
his people.

7:17 And this rumour of him went forth throughout all Judaea, and
throughout all the region round about.

7:18 And the disciples of John shewed him of all these things.

7:19 And John calling unto him two of his disciples sent them to
Jesus, saying, Art thou he that should come? or look we for another?
7:20 When the men were come unto him, they said, John Baptist hath
sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou he that should come? or look we
for another?  7:21 And in that same hour he cured many of their
infirmities and plagues, and of evil spirits; and unto many that were
blind he gave sight.

7:22 Then Jesus answering said unto them, Go your way, and tell John
what things ye have seen and heard; how that the blind see, the lame
walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, to
the poor the gospel is preached.

7:23 And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me.

7:24 And when the messengers of John were departed, he began to speak
unto the people concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness
for to see?  A reed shaken with the wind?  7:25 But what went ye out
for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment?  Behold, they which are
gorgeously apparelled, and live delicately, are in kings' courts.

7:26 But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you,
and much more than a prophet.

7:27 This is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger
before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

7:28 For I say unto you, Among those that are born of women there is
not a greater prophet than John the Baptist: but he that is least in
the kingdom of God is greater than he.

7:29 And all the people that heard him, and the publicans, justified
God, being baptized with the baptism of John.

7:30 But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against
themselves, being not baptized of him.

7:31 And the Lord said, Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this
generation? and to what are they like?  7:32 They are like unto
children sitting in the marketplace, and calling one to another, and
saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have
mourned to you, and ye have not wept.

7:33 For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine;
and ye say, He hath a devil.

7:34 The Son of man is come eating and drinking; and ye say, Behold a
gluttonous man, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners!
7:35 But wisdom is justified of all her children.

7:36 And one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him.
And he went into the Pharisee's house, and sat down to meat.

7:37 And, behold, a woman in the city, which was a sinner, when she
knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee's house, brought an
alabaster box of ointment, 7:38 And stood at his feet behind him
weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with
the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the
ointment.

7:39 Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him saw it, he spake
within himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet, would have
known who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him: for she
is a sinner.

7:40 And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say
unto thee. And he saith, Master, say on.

7:41 There was a certain creditor which had two debtors: the one owed
five hundred pence, and the other fifty.

7:42 And when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both.
Tell me therefore, which of them will love him most?  7:43 Simon
answered and said, I suppose that he, to whom he forgave most.

And he said unto him, Thou hast rightly judged.

7:44 And he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Seest thou this
woman? I entered into thine house, thou gavest me no water for my
feet: but she hath washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the
hairs of her head.

7:45 Thou gavest me no kiss: but this woman since the time I came in
hath not ceased to kiss my feet.

7:46 My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath
anointed my feet with ointment.

7:47 Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are
forgiven; for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same
loveth little.

7:48 And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven.

7:49 And they that sat at meat with him began to say within
themselves, Who is this that forgiveth sins also?  7:50 And he said to
the woman, Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace.

8:1 And it came to pass afterward, that he went throughout every city
and village, preaching and shewing the glad tidings of the kingdom of
God: and the twelve were with him, 8:2 And certain women, which had
been healed of evil spirits and infirmities, Mary called Magdalene,
out of whom went seven devils, 8:3 And Joanna the wife of Chuza
Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many others, which ministered unto
him of their substance.

8:4 And when much people were gathered together, and were come to him
out of every city, he spake by a parable: 8:5 A sower went out to sow
his seed: and as he sowed, some fell by the way side; and it was
trodden down, and the fowls of the air devoured it.

8:6 And some fell upon a rock; and as soon as it was sprung up, it
withered away, because it lacked moisture.

8:7 And some fell among thorns; and the thorns sprang up with it, and
choked it.

8:8 And other fell on good ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit an
hundredfold. And when he had said these things, he cried, He that hath
ears to hear, let him hear.

8:9 And his disciples asked him, saying, What might this parable be?
8:10 And he said, Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of God: but to others in parables; that seeing they might not
see, and hearing they might not understand.

8:11 Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God.

8:12 Those by the way side are they that hear; then cometh the devil,
and taketh away the word out of their hearts, lest they should believe
and be saved.

8:13 They on the rock are they, which, when they hear, receive the
word with joy; and these have no root, which for a while believe, and
in time of temptation fall away.

8:14 And that which fell among thorns are they, which, when they have
heard, go forth, and are choked with cares and riches and pleasures of
this life, and bring no fruit to perfection.

8:15 But that on the good ground are they, which in an honest and good
heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with
patience.

8:16 No man, when he hath lighted a candle, covereth it with a vessel,
or putteth it under a bed; but setteth it on a candlestick, that they
which enter in may see the light.

8:17 For nothing is secret, that shall not be made manifest; neither
any thing hid, that shall not be known and come abroad.

8:18 Take heed therefore how ye hear: for whosoever hath, to him shall
be given; and whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken even that
which he seemeth to have.

8:19 Then came to him his mother and his brethren, and could not come
at him for the press.

8:20 And it was told him by certain which said, Thy mother and thy
brethren stand without, desiring to see thee.

8:21 And he answered and said unto them, My mother and my brethren are
these which hear the word of God, and do it.

8:22 Now it came to pass on a certain day, that he went into a ship
with his disciples: and he said unto them, Let us go over unto the
other side of the lake. And they launched forth.

8:23 But as they sailed he fell asleep: and there came down a storm of
wind on the lake; and they were filled with water, and were in
jeopardy.

8:24 And they came to him, and awoke him, saying, Master, master, we
perish. Then he arose, and rebuked the wind and the raging of the
water: and they ceased, and there was a calm.

8:25 And he said unto them, Where is your faith? And they being afraid
wondered, saying one to another, What manner of man is this! for he
commandeth even the winds and water, and they obey him.

8:26 And they arrived at the country of the Gadarenes, which is over
against Galilee.

8:27 And when he went forth to land, there met him out of the city a
certain man, which had devils long time, and ware no clothes, neither
abode in any house, but in the tombs.

8:28 When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down before him, and
with a loud voice said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son
of God most high? I beseech thee, torment me not.

8:29 (For he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man.
For oftentimes it had caught him: and he was kept bound with chains
and in fetters; and he brake the bands, and was driven of the devil
into the wilderness.)  8:30 And Jesus asked him, saying, What is thy
name? And he said, Legion: because many devils were entered into him.

8:31 And they besought him that he would not command them to go out
into the deep.

8:32 And there was there an herd of many swine feeding on the
mountain: and they besought him that he would suffer them to enter
into them. And he suffered them.

8:33 Then went the devils out of the man, and entered into the swine:
and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the lake, and were
choked.

8:34 When they that fed them saw what was done, they fled, and went
and told it in the city and in the country.

8:35 Then they went out to see what was done; and came to Jesus, and
found the man, out of whom the devils were departed, sitting at the
feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind: and they were afraid.

8:36 They also which saw it told them by what means he that was
possessed of the devils was healed.

8:37 Then the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarenes round
about besought him to depart from them; for they were taken with great
fear: and he went up into the ship, and returned back again.

8:38 Now the man out of whom the devils were departed besought him
that he might be with him: but Jesus sent him away, saying, 8:39
Return to thine own house, and shew how great things God hath done
unto thee. And he went his way, and published throughout the whole
city how great things Jesus had done unto him.

8:40 And it came to pass, that, when Jesus was returned, the people
gladly received him: for they were all waiting for him.

8:41 And, behold, there came a man named Jairus, and he was a ruler of
the synagogue: and he fell down at Jesus' feet, and besought him that
he would come into his house: 8:42 For he had one only daughter, about
twelve years of age, and she lay a dying. But as he went the people
thronged him.

8:43 And a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, which had
spent all her living upon physicians, neither could be healed of any,
8:44 Came behind him, and touched the border of his garment: and
immediately her issue of blood stanched.

8:45 And Jesus said, Who touched me? When all denied, Peter and they
that were with him said, Master, the multitude throng thee and press
thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?  8:46 And Jesus said, Somebody
hath touched me: for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me.

8:47 And when the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling,
and falling down before him, she declared unto him before all the
people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was healed
immediately.

8:48 And he said unto her, Daughter, be of good comfort: thy faith
hath made thee whole; go in peace.

8:49 While he yet spake, there cometh one from the ruler of the
synagogue's house, saying to him, Thy daughter is dead; trouble not
the Master.

8:50 But when Jesus heard it, he answered him, saying, Fear not:
believe only, and she shall be made whole.

8:51 And when he came into the house, he suffered no man to go in,
save Peter, and James, and John, and the father and the mother of the
maiden.

8:52 And all wept, and bewailed her: but he said, Weep not; she is not
dead, but sleepeth.

8:53 And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead.

8:54 And he put them all out, and took her by the hand, and called,
saying, Maid, arise.

8:55 And her spirit came again, and she arose straightway: and he
commanded to give her meat.

8:56 And her parents were astonished: but he charged them that they
should tell no man what was done.

9:1 Then he called his twelve disciples together, and gave them power
and authority over all devils, and to cure diseases.

9:2 And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the
sick.

9:3 And he said unto them, Take nothing for your journey, neither
staves, nor scrip, neither bread, neither money; neither have two
coats apiece.

9:4 And whatsoever house ye enter into, there abide, and thence
depart.

9:5 And whosoever will not receive you, when ye go out of that city,
shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony against them.

9:6 And they departed, and went through the towns, preaching the
gospel, and healing every where.

9:7 Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him: and he
was perplexed, because that it was said of some, that John was risen
from the dead; 9:8 And of some, that Elias had appeared; and of
others, that one of the old prophets was risen again.

9:9 And Herod said, John have I beheaded: but who is this, of whom I
hear such things? And he desired to see him.

9:10 And the apostles, when they were returned, told him all that they
had done. And he took them, and went aside privately into a desert
place belonging to the city called Bethsaida.

9:11 And the people, when they knew it, followed him: and he received
them, and spake unto them of the kingdom of God, and healed them that
had need of healing.

9:12 And when the day began to wear away, then came the twelve, and
said unto him, Send the multitude away, that they may go into the
towns and country round about, and lodge, and get victuals: for we are
here in a desert place.

9:13 But he said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they said, We
have no more but five loaves and two fishes; except we should go and
buy meat for all this people.

9:14 For they were about five thousand men. And he said to his
disciples, Make them sit down by fifties in a company.

9:15 And they did so, and made them all sit down.

9:16 Then he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up
to heaven, he blessed them, and brake, and gave to the disciples to
set before the multitude.

9:17 And they did eat, and were all filled: and there was taken up of
fragments that remained to them twelve baskets.

9:18 And it came to pass, as he was alone praying, his disciples were
with him: and he asked them, saying, Whom say the people that I am?
9:19 They answering said, John the Baptist; but some say, Elias; and
others say, that one of the old prophets is risen again.

9:20 He said unto them, But whom say ye that I am? Peter answering
said, The Christ of God.

9:21 And he straitly charged them, and commanded them to tell no man
that thing; 9:22 Saying, The Son of man must suffer many things, and
be rejected of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be slain,
and be raised the third day.

9:23 And he said to them all, If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.

9:24 For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: but whosoever
will lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it.

9:25 For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and
lose himself, or be cast away?  9:26 For whosoever shall be ashamed of
me and of my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he
shall come in his own glory, and in his Father's, and of the holy
angels.

9:27 But I tell you of a truth, there be some standing here, which
shall not taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God.

9:28 And it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings, he
took Peter and John and James, and went up into a mountain to pray.

9:29 And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and
his raiment was white and glistering.

9:30 And, behold, there talked with him two men, which were Moses and
Elias: 9:31 Who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he
should accomplish at Jerusalem.

9:32 But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep: and
when they were awake, they saw his glory, and the two men that stood
with him.

9:33 And it came to pass, as they departed from him, Peter said unto
Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three
tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias: not
knowing what he said.

9:34 While he thus spake, there came a cloud, and overshadowed them:
and they feared as they entered into the cloud.

9:35 And there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my
beloved Son: hear him.

9:36 And when the voice was past, Jesus was found alone. And they kept
it close, and told no man in those days any of those things which they
had seen.

9:37 And it came to pass, that on the next day, when they were come
down from the hill, much people met him.

9:38 And, behold, a man of the company cried out, saying, Master, I
beseech thee, look upon my son: for he is mine only child.

9:39 And, lo, a spirit taketh him, and he suddenly crieth out; and it
teareth him that he foameth again, and bruising him hardly departeth
from him.

9:40 And I besought thy disciples to cast him out; and they could not.

9:41 And Jesus answering said, O faithless and perverse generation,
how long shall I be with you, and suffer you? Bring thy son hither.

9:42 And as he was yet a coming, the devil threw him down, and tare
him.

And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the child, and
delivered him again to his father.

9:43 And they were all amazed at the mighty power of God. But while
they wondered every one at all things which Jesus did, he said unto
his disciples, 9:44 Let these sayings sink down into your ears: for
the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men.

9:45 But they understood not this saying, and it was hid from them,
that they perceived it not: and they feared to ask him of that saying.

9:46 Then there arose a reasoning among them, which of them should be
greatest.

9:47 And Jesus, perceiving the thought of their heart, took a child,
and set him by him, 9:48 And said unto them, Whosoever shall receive
this child in my name receiveth me: and whosoever shall receive me
receiveth him that sent me: for he that is least among you all, the
same shall be great.

9:49 And John answered and said, Master, we saw one casting out devils
in thy name; and we forbad him, because he followeth not with us.

9:50 And Jesus said unto him, Forbid him not: for he that is not
against us is for us.

9:51 And it came to pass, when the time was come that he should be
received up, he stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem, 9:52 And
sent messengers before his face: and they went, and entered into a
village of the Samaritans, to make ready for him.

9:53 And they did not receive him, because his face was as though he
would go to Jerusalem.

9:54 And when his disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord,
wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume
them, even as Elias did?  9:55 But he turned, and rebuked them, and
said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of.

9:56 For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to
save them. And they went to another village.

