to iniquity unto iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to
righteousness unto holiness.

6:20 For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from
righteousness.

6:21 What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed?  for the end of those things is death.

6:22 But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye
have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.

6:23 For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal
life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

7:1 Know ye not, brethren, (for I speak to them that know the law,)
how that the law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth?  7:2
For the woman which hath an husband is bound by the law to her husband
so long as he liveth; but if the husband be dead, she is loosed from
the law of her husband.

7:3 So then if, while her husband liveth, she be married to another
man, she shall be called an adulteress: but if her husband be dead,
she is free from that law; so that she is no adulteress, though she be
married to another man.

7:4 Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law by the
body of Christ; that ye should be married to another, even to him who
is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God.

7:5 For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins, which were by
the law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death.

7:6 But now we are delivered from the law, that being dead wherein we
were held; that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the
oldness of the letter.

7:7 What shall we say then? Is the law sin? God forbid. Nay, I had not
known sin, but by the law: for I had not known lust, except the law
had said, Thou shalt not covet.

7:8 But sin, taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all
manner of concupiscence. For without the law sin was dead.

7:9 For I was alive without the law once: but when the commandment
came, sin revived, and I died.

7:10 And the commandment, which was ordained to life, I found to be
unto death.

7:11 For sin, taking occasion by the commandment, deceived me, and by
it slew me.

7:12 Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just,
and good.

7:13 Was then that which is good made death unto me? God forbid. But
sin, that it might appear sin, working death in me by that which is
good; that sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful.

7:14 For we know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold
under sin.

7:15 For that which I do I allow not: for what I would, that do I not;
but what I hate, that do I.

7:16 If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the law that
it is good.

7:17 Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.

7:18 For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh,) dwelleth no good
thing: for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which
is good I find not.

7:19 For the good that I would I do not: but the evil which I would
not, that I do.

7:20 Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin
that dwelleth in me.

7:21 I find then a law, that, when I would do good, evil is present
with me.

7:22 For I delight in the law of God after the inward man: 7:23 But I
see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members.

7:24 O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of
this death?  7:25 I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then
with the mind I myself serve the law of God; but with the flesh the
law of sin.

8:1 There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

8:2 For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me
free from the law of sin and death.

8:3 For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the
flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and
for sin, condemned sin in the flesh: 8:4 That the righteousness of the
law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit.

8:5 For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh;
but they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit.

8:6 For to be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually minded
is life and peace.

8:7 Because the carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is not
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.

8:8 So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God.

8:9 But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the
Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his.

8:10 And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the
Spirit is life because of righteousness.

8:11 But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell
in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your
mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you.

8:12 Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live
after the flesh.

8:13 For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through
the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.

8:14 For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of
God.

8:15 For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but
ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.

8:16 The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are
the children of God: 8:17 And if children, then heirs; heirs of God,
and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we
may be also glorified together.

8:18 For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.

8:19 For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the
manifestation of the sons of God.

8:20 For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but
by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope, 8:21 Because the
creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption
into the glorious liberty of the children of God.

8:22 For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in
pain together until now.

8:23 And not only they, but ourselves also, which have the firstfruits
of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for
the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.

8:24 For we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope: for
what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for?  8:25 But if we hope for
that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it.

8:26 Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not
what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered.

8:27 And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the
Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the
will of God.

8:28 And we know that all things work together for good to them that
love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose.

8:29 For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn
among many brethren.

8:30 Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom
he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also
glorified.

8:31 What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can
be against us?  8:32 He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him
up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things?  8:33 Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? It
is God that justifieth.

8:34 Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather,
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
maketh intercession for us.

8:35 Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation,
or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword?  8:36 As it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day
long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.

8:37 Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him
that loved us.

8:38 For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
8:39 Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

9:1 I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing
me witness in the Holy Ghost, 9:2 That I have great heaviness and
continual sorrow in my heart.

9:3 For I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ for my
brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh: 9:4 Who are Israelites;
to whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and
the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises; 9:5
Whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ
came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen.

9:6 Not as though the word of God hath taken none effect. For they are
not all Israel, which are of Israel: 9:7 Neither, because they are the
seed of Abraham, are they all children: but, In Isaac shall thy seed
be called.

9:8 That is, They which are the children of the flesh, these are not
the children of God: but the children of the promise are counted for
the seed.

9:9 For this is the word of promise, At this time will I come, and
Sarah shall have a son.

9:10 And not only this; but when Rebecca also had conceived by one,
even by our father Isaac; 9:11 (For the children being not yet born,
neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God
according to election might stand, not of works, but of him that
calleth;) 9:12 It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the
younger.

9:13 As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.

9:14 What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid.

9:15 For he saith to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.

9:16 So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth,
but of God that sheweth mercy.

9:17 For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose
have I raised thee up, that I might shew my power in thee, and that my
name might be declared throughout all the earth.

9:18 Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he
will he hardeneth.

9:19 Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth he yet find fault? For who
hath resisted his will?  9:20 Nay but, O man, who art thou that
repliest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed
it, Why hast thou made me thus?  9:21 Hath not the potter power over
the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honour, and another
unto dishonour?  9:22 What if God, willing to shew his wrath, and to
make his power known, endured with much longsuffering the vessels of
wrath fitted to destruction: 9:23 And that he might make known the
riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had afore
prepared unto glory, 9:24 Even us, whom he hath called, not of the
Jews only, but also of the Gentiles?  9:25 As he saith also in Osee, I
will call them my people, which were not my people; and her beloved,
which was not beloved.

9:26 And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said
unto them, Ye are not my people; there shall they be called the
children of the living God.

9:27 Esaias also crieth concerning Israel, Though the number of the
children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be
saved: 9:28 For he will finish the work, and cut it short in
righteousness: because a short work will the Lord make upon the earth.

9:29 And as Esaias said before, Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left us
a seed, we had been as Sodoma, and been made like unto Gomorrha.

9:30 What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, which followed not
after righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the
righteousness which is of faith.

9:31 But Israel, which followed after the law of righteousness, hath
not attained to the law of righteousness.

9:32 Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by
the works of the law. For they stumbled at that stumblingstone; 9:33
As it is written, Behold, I lay in Sion a stumblingstone and rock of
offence: and whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed.

10:1 Brethren, my heart's desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that
they might be saved.

10:2 For I bear them record that they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge.

10:3 For they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about
to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves
unto the righteousness of God.

10:4 For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one
that believeth.

10:5 For Moses describeth the righteousness which is of the law, That
the man which doeth those things shall live by them.

10:6 But the righteousness which is of faith speaketh on this wise,
Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to
bring Christ down from above:) 10:7 Or, Who shall descend into the
deep? (that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead.)  10:8 But
what saith it? The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy
heart: that is, the word of faith, which we preach; 10:9 That if thou
shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in
thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be
saved.

10:10 For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with
the mouth confession is made unto salvation.

10:11 For the scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on him shall not be
ashamed.

10:12 For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek: for
the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him.

10:13 For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be
saved.

10:14 How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?
and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how
shall they hear without a preacher?  10:15 And how shall they preach,
except they be sent? as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of
them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good
things!  10:16 But they have not all obeyed the gospel. For Esaias
saith, Lord, who hath believed our report?  10:17 So then faith cometh
by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

10:18 But I say, Have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went
into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.

10:19 But I say, Did not Israel know? First Moses saith, I will
provoke you to jealousy by them that are no people, and by a foolish
nation I will anger you.

10:20 But Esaias is very bold, and saith, I was found of them that
sought me not; I was made manifest unto them that asked not after me.

10:21 But to Israel he saith, All day long I have stretched forth my
hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people.

11:1 I say then, Hath God cast away his people? God forbid. For I also
am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.

11:2 God hath not cast away his people which he foreknew. Wot ye not
what the scripture saith of Elias? how he maketh intercession to God
against Israel saying, 11:3 Lord, they have killed thy prophets, and
digged down thine altars; and I am left alone, and they seek my life.

11:4 But what saith the answer of God unto him? I have reserved to
myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to the image of
Baal.

11:5 Even so then at this present time also there is a remnant
according to the election of grace.

11:6 And if by grace, then is it no more of works: otherwise grace is
no more grace. But if it be of works, then it is no more grace:
otherwise work is no more work.

11:7 What then? Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for;
but the election hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded.

11:8 (According as it is written, God hath given them the spirit of
slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not
hear;) unto this day.

11:9 And David saith, Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, and
a stumblingblock, and a recompence unto them: 11:10 Let their eyes be
darkened, that they may not see, and bow down their back alway.

11:11 I say then, Have they stumbled that they should fall? God
forbid: but rather through their fall salvation is come unto the
Gentiles, for to provoke them to jealousy.

11:12 Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the
diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles; how much more their
fulness?  11:13 For I speak to you Gentiles, inasmuch as I am the
apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify mine office: 11:14 If by any means
I may provoke to emulation them which are my flesh, and might save
some of them.

11:15 For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world,
what shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead?  11:16
For if the firstfruit be holy, the lump is also holy: and if the root
be holy, so are the branches.

11:17 And if some of the branches be broken off, and thou, being a
wild olive tree, wert graffed in among them, and with them partakest
of the root and fatness of the olive tree; 11:18 Boast not against the
branches. But if thou boast, thou bearest not the root, but the root
thee.

11:19 Thou wilt say then, The branches were broken off, that I might
be graffed in.

11:20 Well; because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou
standest by faith. Be not highminded, but fear: 11:21 For if God
spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not
thee.

11:22 Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: on them which
fell, severity; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his
goodness: otherwise thou also shalt be cut off.

11:23 And they also, if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be
graffed in: for God is able to graff them in again.

11:24 For if thou wert cut out of the olive tree which is wild by
nature, and wert graffed contrary to nature into a good olive tree:
how much more shall these, which be the natural branches, be graffed
into their own olive tree?  11:25 For I would not, brethren, that ye
should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own
conceits; that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the
fulness of the Gentiles be come in.

11:26 And so all Israel shall be saved: as it is written, There shall
come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from
Jacob: 11:27 For this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away
their sins.

11:28 As concerning the gospel, they are enemies for your sakes: but
as touching the election, they are beloved for the father's sakes.

11:29 For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.

11:30 For as ye in times past have not believed God, yet have now
obtained mercy through their unbelief: 11:31 Even so have these also
now not believed, that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy.

11:32 For God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon all.

11:33 O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God!  how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding
out!  11:34 For who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been
his counsellor?  11:35 Or who hath first given to him, and it shall be
recompensed unto him again?  11:36 For of him, and through him, and to
him, are all things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen.

12:1 I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable service.

12:2 And be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and
acceptable, and perfect, will of God.

12:3 For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is
among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think;
but to think soberly, according as God hath dealt to every man the
measure of faith.

12:4 For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not
the same office: 12:5 So we, being many, are one body in Christ, and
every one members one of another.

12:6 Having then gifts differing according to the grace that is given
to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion
of faith; 12:7 Or ministry, let us wait on our ministering: or he that
teacheth, on teaching; 12:8 Or he that exhorteth, on exhortation: he
that giveth, let him do it with simplicity; he that ruleth, with
diligence; he that sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness.

12:9 Let love be without dissimulation. Abhor that which is evil;
cleave to that which is good.

12:10 Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love; in
honour preferring one another; 12:11 Not slothful in business; fervent
in spirit; serving the Lord; 12:12 Rejoicing in hope; patient in
tribulation; continuing instant in prayer; 12:13 Distributing to the
necessity of saints; given to hospitality.

12:14 Bless them which persecute you: bless, and curse not.

12:15 Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

12:16 Be of the same mind one toward another. Mind not high things,
but condescend to men of low estate. Be not wise in your own conceits.

12:17 Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide things honest in the
sight of all men.

12:18 If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with
all men.

12:19 Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place
unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith
the Lord.

12:20 Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give
him drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head.

12:21 Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.

13:1 Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no
power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God.

13:2 Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance
of God: and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.

13:3 For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Wilt
thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou
shalt have praise of the same: 13:4 For he is the minister of God to
thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he
beareth not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, a
revenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth evil.

13:5 Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also
for conscience sake.

13:6 For for this cause pay ye tribute also: for they are God's
ministers, attending continually upon this very thing.

13:7 Render therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is
due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to whom honour.

13:8 Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loveth
another hath fulfilled the law.

13:9 For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill,
Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness, Thou shalt
not covet; and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly
comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself.

13:10 Love worketh no ill to his neighbour: therefore love is the
fulfilling of the law.

13:11 And that, knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake
out of sleep: for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed.

13:12 The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore
cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armour of light.

13:13 Let us walk honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and
envying.

13:14 But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for
the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof.

14:1 Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful
disputations.

14:2 For one believeth that he may eat all things: another, who is
weak, eateth herbs.

14:3 Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth not; and let not
him which eateth not judge him that eateth: for God hath received him.

14:4 Who art thou that judgest another man's servant? to his own
master he standeth or falleth. Yea, he shall be holden up: for God is
able to make him stand.

14:5 One man esteemeth one day above another: another esteemeth every
day alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.

14:6 He that regardeth the day, regardeth it unto the Lord; and he
that regardeth not the day, to the Lord he doth not regard it. He that
eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth God thanks; and he that
eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and giveth God thanks.

14:7 For none of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself.

14:8 For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die,
we die unto the Lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the
Lord's.

14:9 For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he
might be Lord both of the dead and living.

14:10 But why dost thou judge thy brother? or why dost thou set at
nought thy brother? for we shall all stand before the judgment seat of
Christ.

14:11 For it is written, As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall
bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God.

14:12 So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God.

14:13 Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge this
rather, that no man put a stumblingblock or an occasion to fall in his
brother's way.

14:14 I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is
nothing unclean of itself: but to him that esteemeth any thing to be
unclean, to him it is unclean.

14:15 But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walkest thou
not charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died.

14:16 Let not then your good be evil spoken of: 14:17 For the kingdom
of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in
the Holy Ghost.

14:18 For he that in these things serveth Christ is acceptable to God,
and approved of men.

14:19 Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace,
and things wherewith one may edify another.

14:20 For meat destroy not the work of God. All things indeed are
pure; but it is evil for that man who eateth with offence.

14:21 It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any
thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak.

14:22 Hast thou faith? have it to thyself before God. Happy is he that
condemneth not himself in that thing which he alloweth.

14:23 And he that doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth not
of faith: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

15:1 We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak, and not to please ourselves.

15:2 Let every one of us please his neighbour for his good to
edification.

15:3 For even Christ pleased not himself; but, as it is written, The
reproaches of them that reproached thee fell on me.

15:4 For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might
have hope.

15:5 Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be
likeminded one toward another according to Christ Jesus: 15:6 That ye
may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

15:7 Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to
the glory of God.

15:8 Now I say that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision
for the truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the fathers:
15:9 And that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy; as it is
written, For this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, and
sing unto thy name.

15:10 And again he saith, Rejoice, ye Gentiles, with his people.

15:11 And again, Praise the Lord, all ye Gentiles; and laud him, all
ye people.

15:12 And again, Esaias saith, There shall be a root of Jesse, and he
that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles; in him shall the Gentiles
trust.

15:13 Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy
Ghost.

15:14 And I myself also am persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye also
are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish
one another.

15:15 Nevertheless, brethren, I have written the more boldly unto you
in some sort, as putting you in mind, because of the grace that is
given to me of God, 15:16 That I should be the minister of Jesus
Christ to the Gentiles, ministering the gospel of God, that the
offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by
the Holy Ghost.

15:17 I have therefore whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ in
those things which pertain to God.

15:18 For I will not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ
hath not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient, by word and
deed, 15:19 Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the
Spirit of God; so that from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum,
I have fully preached the gospel of Christ.

15:20 Yea, so have I strived to preach the gospel, not where Christ
was named, lest I should build upon another man's foundation: 15:21
But as it is written, To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see:
and they that have not heard shall understand.

15:22 For which cause also I have been much hindered from coming to
you.

15:23 But now having no more place in these parts, and having a great
desire these many years to come unto you; 15:24 Whensoever I take my
journey into Spain, I will come to you: for I trust to see you in my
journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward by you, if first I be
somewhat filled with your company.

15:25 But now I go unto Jerusalem to minister unto the saints.

15:26 For it hath pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a
certain contribution for the poor saints which are at Jerusalem.

15:27 It hath pleased them verily; and their debtors they are. For if
the Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, their
duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things.

15:28 When therefore I have performed this, and have sealed to them
this fruit, I will come by you into Spain.

15:29 And I am sure that, when I come unto you, I shall come in the
fulness of the blessing of the gospel of Christ.

15:30 Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake,
and for the love of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in
your prayers to God for me; 15:31 That I may be delivered from them
that do not believe in Judaea; and that my service which I have for
Jerusalem may be accepted of the saints; 15:32 That I may come unto
you with joy by the will of God, and may with you be refreshed.

15:33 Now the God of peace be with you all. Amen.

16:1 I commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the
church which is at Cenchrea: 16:2 That ye receive her in the Lord, as
becometh saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever business she
hath need of you: for she hath been a succourer of many, and of myself
also.

16:3 Greet Priscilla and Aquila my helpers in Christ Jesus: 16:4 Who
have for my life laid down their own necks: unto whom not only I give
thanks, but also all the churches of the Gentiles.

16:5 Likewise greet the church that is in their house. Salute my
well-beloved Epaenetus, who is the firstfruits of Achaia unto Christ.

16:6 Greet Mary, who bestowed much labour on us.

16:7 Salute Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen, and my fellow-prisoners,
who are of note among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me.

16:8 Greet Amplias my beloved in the Lord.

16:9 Salute Urbane, our helper in Christ, and Stachys my beloved.

16:10 Salute Apelles approved in Christ. Salute them which are of
Aristobulus' household.

16:11 Salute Herodion my kinsman. Greet them that be of the household
of Narcissus, which are in the Lord.

16:12 Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labour in the Lord. Salute the
beloved Persis, which laboured much in the Lord.

16:13 Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine.

16:14 Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the
brethren which are with them.

16:15 Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus, and his sister, and
Olympas, and all the saints which are with them.

16:16 Salute one another with an holy kiss. The churches of Christ
salute you.

16:17 Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and
offences contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid
them.

16:18 For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the
hearts of the simple.

16:19 For your obedience is come abroad unto all men. I am glad
therefore on your behalf: but yet I would have you wise unto that
which is good, and simple concerning evil.

16:20 And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.

16:21 Timotheus my workfellow, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater,
my kinsmen, salute you.

16:22 I Tertius, who wrote this epistle, salute you in the Lord.

16:23 Gaius mine host, and of the whole church, saluteth you. Erastus
the chamberlain of the city saluteth you, and Quartus a brother.

16:24 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

16:25 Now to him that is of power to stablish you according to my
gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation
of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began, 16:26 But
now is made manifest, and by the scriptures of the prophets, according
to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations
for the obedience of faith: 16:27 To God only wise, be glory through
Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.



The First Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians


1:1 Paul called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of
God, and Sosthenes our brother, 1:2 Unto the church of God which is at
Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be
saints, with all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus
Christ our Lord, both their's and our's: 1:3 Grace be unto you, and
peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

1:4 I thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of God which
is given you by Jesus Christ; 1:5 That in every thing ye are enriched
by him, in all utterance, and in all knowledge; 1:6 Even as the
testimony of Christ was confirmed in you: 1:7 So that ye come behind
in no gift; waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: 1:8 Who
shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the
day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

1:9 God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his
Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

1:10 Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no
divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the
same mind and in the same judgment.

1:11 For it hath been declared unto me of you, my brethren, by them
which are of the house of Chloe, that there are contentions among you.

1:12 Now this I say, that every one of you saith, I am of Paul; and I
of Apollos; and I of Cephas; and I of Christ.

1:13 Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye
baptized in the name of Paul?  1:14 I thank God that I baptized none
of you, but Crispus and Gaius; 1:15 Lest any should say that I had
baptized in mine own name.

1:16 And I baptized also the household of Stephanas: besides, I know
not whether I baptized any other.

1:17 For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel: not
with wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ should be made of none
effect.

1:18 For the preaching of the cross is to them that perish
foolishness; but unto us which are saved it is the power of God.

1:19 For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and
will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent.

1:20 Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of
this world? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?  1:21
For after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God,
it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe.

1:22 For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom:
1:23 But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumblingblock,
and unto the Greeks foolishness; 1:24 But unto them which are called,
both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.

1:25 Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the
weakness of God is stronger than men.

1:26 For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: 1:27 But
God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise;
and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the
things which are mighty; 1:28 And base things of the world, and things
which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to
bring to nought things that are: 1:29 That no flesh should glory in
his presence.

1:30 But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: 1:31
That, according as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in
the Lord.

2:1 And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of
speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God.

2:2 For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified.

2:3 And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much
trembling.

2:4 And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of
man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power: 2:5
That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the
power of God.

2:6 Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect: yet not the
wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this world, that come to
nought: 2:7 But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the
hidden wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto our glory: 2:8
Which none of the princes of this world knew: for had they known it,
they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.

2:9 But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared
for them that love him.

2:10 But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit
searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.

2:11 For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man
which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the
Spirit of God.

2:12 Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit
which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given
to us of God.

2:13 Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual
things with spiritual.

2:14 But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of
God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned.

2:15 But he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet he himself is
judged of no man.

2:16 For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct
him?  But we have the mind of Christ.

3:1 And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but
as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ.

3:2 I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye were
not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able.

3:3 For ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is among you envying, and
strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?  3:4 For
while one saith, I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apollos; are ye
not carnal?  3:5 Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but ministers
by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man?  3:6 I have
planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase.

3:7 So then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
watereth; but God that giveth the increase.

3:8 Now he that planteth and he that watereth are one: and every man
shall receive his own reward according to his own labour.

3:9 For we are labourers together with God: ye are God's husbandry, ye
are God's building.

3:10 According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise
masterbuilder, I have laid the foundation, and another buildeth
thereon. But let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon.

3:11 For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ.

3:12 Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious
stones, wood, hay, stubble; 3:13 Every man's work shall be made
manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed
by fire; and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is.

3:14 If any man's work abide which he hath built thereupon, he shall
receive a reward.

3:15 If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but he
himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire.

3:16 Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of
God dwelleth in you?  3:17 If any man defile the temple of God, him
shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.

3:18 Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you seemeth to be
wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

3:19 For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is
written, He taketh the wise in their own craftiness.

3:20 And again, The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they
are vain.

3:21 Therefore let no man glory in men. For all things are your's;
3:22 Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
death, or things present, or things to come; all are your's; 3:23 And
ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's.

4:1 Let a man so account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and
stewards of the mysteries of God.

4:2 Moreover it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful.

4:3 But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of
you, or of man's judgment: yea, I judge not mine own self.

4:4 For I know nothing by myself; yet am I not hereby justified: but
he that judgeth me is the Lord.

4:5 Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who
