uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free: but Christ is all, and in
all.

3:12  Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of
mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering;
3:13  Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a
quarrel against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

3:14  And above all these things put on charity, which is the bond of
perfectness.

3:15  And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye
are called in one body; and be ye thankful.

3:16  Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching
and admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing
with grace in your hearts to the Lord.

3:17  And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him.

3:18  Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as it is fit in the
Lord.

3:19  Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them.

3:20  Children, obey your parents in all things: for this is well pleasing
unto the Lord.

3:21  Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be
discouraged.

3:22  Servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh; not
with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but in singleness of heart, fearing God;
3:23  And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto
men;
3:24  Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the
inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ.

3:25  But he that doeth wrong shall receive for the wrong which he hath
done: and there is no respect of persons.

4:1  Masters, give unto your servants that which is just and equal; knowing
that ye also have a Master in heaven.

4:2  Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving;
4:3  Withal praying also for us, that God would open unto us a door of
utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ, for which I am also in bonds:
4:4  That I may make it manifest, as I ought to speak.

4:5  Walk in wisdom toward them that are without, redeeming the time.

4:6  Let your speech be alway with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may
know how ye ought to answer every man.

4:7  All my state shall Tychicus declare unto you, who is a beloved
brother, and a faithful minister and fellowservant in the Lord:
4:8  Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know
your estate, and comfort your hearts;
4:9  With Onesimus, a faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. They
shall make known unto you all things which are done here.

4:10  Aristarchus my fellowprisoner saluteth you, and Marcus, sister's son
to Barnabas, (touching whom ye received commandments: if he come unto you,
receive him;)
4:11  And Jesus, which is called Justus, who are of the circumcision. These
only are my fellowworkers unto the kingdom of God, which have been a comfort
unto me.

4:12  Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ, saluteth you,
always labouring fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and
complete in all the will of God.

4:13  For I bear him record, that he hath a great zeal for you, and them
that are in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis.

4:14  Luke, the beloved physician, and Demas, greet you.

4:15  Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the
church which is in his house.

4:16  And when this epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also
in the church of the Laodiceans; and that ye likewise read the epistle from
Laodicea.

4:17  And say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which thou hast
received in the Lord, that thou fulfil it.

4:18  The salutation by the hand of me Paul. Remember my bonds. Grace be
with you. Amen.




The First Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Thessalonians


1:1 Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the church of the
Thessalonians which is in God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ:
Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ.

1:2 We give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in
our prayers; 1:3 Remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and
labour of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the
sight of God and our Father; 1:4 Knowing, brethren beloved, your
election of God.

1:5 For our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power,
and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance; as ye know what manner
of men we were among you for your sake.

1:6 And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord, having received
the word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost.

1:7 So that ye were ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and
Achaia.

1:8 For from you sounded out the word of the Lord not only in
Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place your faith to God-ward
is spread abroad; so that we need not to speak any thing.

1:9 For they themselves shew of us what manner of entering in we had
unto you, and how ye turned to God from idols to serve the living and
true God; 1:10 And to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised
from the dead, even Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come.

2:1 For yourselves, brethren, know our entrance in unto you, that it
was not in vain: 2:2 But even after that we had suffered before, and
were shamefully entreated, as ye know, at Philippi, we were bold in
our God to speak unto you the gospel of God with much contention.

2:3 For our exhortation was not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in
guile: 2:4 But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the
gospel, even so we speak; not as pleasing men, but God, which trieth
our hearts.

2:5 For neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor
a cloke of covetousness; God is witness: 2:6 Nor of men sought we
glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when we might have been
burdensome, as the apostles of Christ.

2:7 But we were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherisheth her
children: 2:8 So being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing
to have imparted unto you, not the gospel of God only, but also our
own souls, because ye were dear unto us.

2:9 For ye remember, brethren, our labour and travail: for labouring
night and day, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, we
preached unto you the gospel of God.

2:10 Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily and justly and
unblameably we behaved ourselves among you that believe: 2:11 As ye
know how we exhorted and comforted and charged every one of you, as a
father doth his children, 2:12 That ye would walk worthy of God, who
hath called you unto his kingdom and glory.

2:13 For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because, when
ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not
as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of God, which
effectually worketh also in you that believe.

2:14 For ye, brethren, became followers of the churches of God which
in Judaea are in Christ Jesus: for ye also have suffered like things
of your own countrymen, even as they have of the Jews: 2:15 Who both
killed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us;
and they please not God, and are contrary to all men: 2:16 Forbidding
us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their
sins alway: for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.

2:17 But we, brethren, being taken from you for a short time in
presence, not in heart, endeavoured the more abundantly to see your
face with great desire.

2:18 Wherefore we would have come unto you, even I Paul, once and
again; but Satan hindered us.

2:19 For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even
ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming?  2:20 For
ye are our glory and joy.

3:1 Wherefore when we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to
be left at Athens alone; 3:2 And sent Timotheus, our brother, and
minister of God, and our fellowlabourer in the gospel of Christ, to
establish you, and to comfort you concerning your faith: 3:3 That no
man should be moved by these afflictions: for yourselves know that we
are appointed thereunto.

3:4 For verily, when we were with you, we told you before that we
should suffer tribulation; even as it came to pass, and ye know.

3:5 For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know
your faith, lest by some means the tempter have tempted you, and our
labour be in vain.

3:6 But now when Timotheus came from you unto us, and brought us good
tidings of your faith and charity, and that ye have good remembrance
of us always, desiring greatly to see us, as we also to see you: 3:7
Therefore, brethren, we were comforted over you in all our affliction
and distress by your faith: 3:8 For now we live, if ye stand fast in
the Lord.

3:9 For what thanks can we render to God again for you, for all the
joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God; 3:10 Night and day
praying exceedingly that we might see your face, and might perfect
that which is lacking in your faith?  3:11 Now God himself and our
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way unto you.

3:12 And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward
another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you: 3:13 To the end
he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even
our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his
saints.

4:1 Furthermore then we beseech you, brethren, and exhort you by the
Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to
please God, so ye would abound more and more.

4:2 For ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus.

4:3 For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye
should abstain from fornication: 4:4 That every one of you should know
how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour; 4:5 Not in the
lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not God: 4:6
That no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter: because
that the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned
you and testified.

4:7 For God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.

4:8 He therefore that despiseth, despiseth not man, but God, who hath
also given unto us his holy Spirit.

4:9 But as touching brotherly love ye need not that I write unto you:
for ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another.

4:10 And indeed ye do it toward all the brethren which are in all
Macedonia: but we beseech you, brethren, that ye increase more and
more; 4:11 And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business,
and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you; 4:12 That ye may
walk honestly toward them that are without, and that ye may have lack
of nothing.

4:13 But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have
no hope.

4:14 For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them
also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

4:15 For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which
are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent
them which are asleep.

4:16 For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with
the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in
Christ shall rise first: 4:17 Then we which are alive and remain shall
be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the
air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

4:18 Wherefore comfort one another with these words.

5:1 But of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I
write unto you.

5:2 For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh
as a thief in the night.

5:3 For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction
cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall
not escape.

5:4 But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should
overtake you as a thief.

5:5 Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we
are not of the night, nor of darkness.

5:6 Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch and be
sober.

5:7 For they that sleep sleep in the night; and they that be drunken
are drunken in the night.

5:8 But let us, who are of the day, be sober, putting on the
breastplate of faith and love; and for an helmet, the hope of
salvation.

5:9 For God hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by
our Lord Jesus Christ, 5:10 Who died for us, that, whether we wake or
sleep, we should live together with him.

5:11 Wherefore comfort yourselves together, and edify one another,
even as also ye do.

5:12 And we beseech you, brethren, to know them which labour among
you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; 5:13 And to
esteem them very highly in love for their work's sake. And be at peace
among yourselves.

5:14 Now we exhort you, brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort
the feebleminded, support the weak, be patient toward all men.

5:15 See that none render evil for evil unto any man; but ever follow
that which is good, both among yourselves, and to all men.

5:16 Rejoice evermore.

5:17 Pray without ceasing.

5:18 In every thing give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ
Jesus concerning you.

5:19 Quench not the Spirit.

5:20 Despise not prophesyings.

5:21 Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.

5:22 Abstain from all appearance of evil.

5:23 And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God
your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

5:24 Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it.

5:25 Brethren, pray for us.

5:26 Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss.

5:27 I charge you by the Lord that this epistle be read unto all the
holy brethren.

5:28 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.




The Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Thessalonians


1:1 Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the church of the
Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: 1:2 Grace
unto you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

1:3 We are bound to thank God always for you, brethren, as it is meet,
because that your faith groweth exceedingly, and the charity of every
one of you all toward each other aboundeth; 1:4 So that we ourselves
glory in you in the churches of God for your patience and faith in all
your persecutions and tribulations that ye endure: 1:5 Which is a
manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be
counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer: 1:6
Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you; 1:7 And to you who are troubled rest with us,
when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty
angels, 1:8 In flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not
God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: 1:9 Who
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power; 1:10 When he shall come to
be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe
(because our testimony among you was believed) in that day.

1:11 Wherefore also we pray always for you, that our God would count
you worthy of this calling, and fulfil all the good pleasure of his
goodness, and the work of faith with power: 1:12 That the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him, according to
the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.

2:1 Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, 2:2 That ye be not
soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word,
nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand.

2:3 Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come,
except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be
revealed, the son of perdition; 2:4 Who opposeth and exalteth himself
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God
sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God.

2:5 Remember ye not, that, when I was yet with you, I told you these
things?  2:6 And now ye know what withholdeth that he might be
revealed in his time.

2:7 For the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now
letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way.

2:8 And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the
brightness of his coming: 2:9 Even him, whose coming is after the
working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders, 2:10 And
with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish;
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved.

2:11 And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they
should believe a lie: 2:12 That they all might be damned who believed
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

2:13 But we are bound to give thanks alway to God for you, brethren
beloved of the Lord, because God hath from the beginning chosen you to
salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the
truth: 2:14 Whereunto he called you by our gospel, to the obtaining of
the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2:15 Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye
have been taught, whether by word, or our epistle.

2:16 Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God, even our Father,
which hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting consolation and
good hope through grace, 2:17 Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in
every good word and work.

3:1 Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have
free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you: 3:2 And that we
may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men: for all men have
not faith.

3:3 But the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you
from evil.

3:4 And we have confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both do
and will do the things which we command you.

3:5 And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the
patient waiting for Christ.

3:6 Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh
disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received of us.

3:7 For yourselves know how ye ought to follow us: for we behaved not
ourselves disorderly among you; 3:8 Neither did we eat any man's bread
for nought; but wrought with labour and travail night and day, that we
might not be chargeable to any of you: 3:9 Not because we have not
power, but to make ourselves an ensample unto you to follow us.

3:10 For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if
any would not work, neither should he eat.

3:11 For we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly,
working not at all, but are busybodies.

3:12 Now them that are such we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus
Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread.

3:13 But ye, brethren, be not weary in well doing.

3:14 And if any man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man,
and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed.

3:15 Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.

3:16 Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always by all means.
The Lord be with you all.

3:17 The salutation of Paul with mine own hand, which is the token in
every epistle: so I write.

3:18 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.




The First Epistle of Paul the Apostle to Timothy


1:1 Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God our
Saviour, and Lord Jesus Christ, which is our hope; 1:2 Unto Timothy,
my own son in the faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God our Father
and Jesus Christ our Lord.

1:3 As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into
Macedonia, that thou mightest charge some that they teach no other
doctrine, 1:4 Neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies,
which minister questions, rather than godly edifying which is in
faith: so do.

1:5 Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and
of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned: 1:6 From which some
having swerved have turned aside unto vain jangling; 1:7 Desiring to
be teachers of the law; understanding neither what they say, nor
whereof they affirm.

1:8 But we know that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully; 1:9
Knowing this, that the law is not made for a righteous man, but for
the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for
unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers,
for manslayers, 1:10 For whoremongers, for them that defile themselves
with mankind, for menstealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and if
there be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine; 1:11
According to the glorious gospel of the blessed God, which was
committed to my trust.

1:12 And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath enabled me, for that
he counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry; 1:13 Who was
before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained
mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief.

1:14 And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with faith and
love which is in Christ Jesus.

1:15 This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief.

1:16 Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus
Christ might shew forth all longsuffering, for a pattern to them which
should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting.

1:17 Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise
God, be honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

1:18 This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy, according to the
prophecies which went before on thee, that thou by them mightest war a
good warfare; 1:19 Holding faith, and a good conscience; which some
having put away concerning faith have made shipwreck: 1:20 Of whom is
Hymenaeus and Alexander; whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they
may learn not to blaspheme.

2:1 I exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men; 2:2 For
kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

2:3 For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour;
2:4 Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge
of the truth.

2:5 For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the
man Christ Jesus; 2:6 Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be
testified in due time.

2:7 Whereunto I am ordained a preacher, and an apostle, (I speak the
truth in Christ, and lie not;) a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and
verity.

2:8 I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands,
without wrath and doubting.

2:9 In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest
apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broided hair, or
gold, or pearls, or costly array; 2:10 But (which becometh women
professing godliness) with good works.

2:11 Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection.

2:12 But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over
the man, but to be in silence.

2:13 For Adam was first formed, then Eve.

2:14 And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in
the transgression.

2:15 Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing, if they
continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety.

3:1 This is a true saying, If a man desire the office of a bishop, he
desireth a good work.

3:2 A bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife,
vigilant, sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to
teach; 3:3 Not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre;
but patient, not a brawler, not covetous; 3:4 One that ruleth well his
own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity; 3:5
(For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take
care of the church of God?)  3:6 Not a novice, lest being lifted up
with pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil.

3:7 Moreover he must have a good report of them which are without;
lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the devil.

3:8 Likewise must the deacons be grave, not doubletongued, not given
to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre; 3:9 Holding the mystery of
the faith in a pure conscience.

3:10 And let these also first be proved; then let them use the office
of a deacon, being found blameless.

3:11 Even so must their wives be grave, not slanderers, sober,
faithful in all things.

3:12 Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, ruling their
children and their own houses well.

3:13 For they that have used the office of a deacon well purchase to
themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith which is in
Christ Jesus.

3:14 These things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly:
3:15 But if I tarry long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to
behave thyself in the house of God, which is the church of the living
God, the pillar and ground of the truth.

3:16 And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness: God
was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into
glory.

4:1 Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some
shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of devils; 4:2 Speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their
conscience seared with a hot iron; 4:3 Forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats, which God hath created to be
received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth.

4:4 For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if
it be received with thanksgiving: 4:5 For it is sanctified by the word
of God and prayer.

4:6 If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou
shalt be a good minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the words of
faith and of good doctrine, whereunto thou hast attained.

4:7 But refuse profane and old wives' fables, and exercise thyself
rather unto godliness.

4:8 For bodily exercise profiteth little: but godliness is profitable
unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come.

4:9 This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation.

4:10 For therefore we both labour and suffer reproach, because we
trust in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, specially of
those that believe.

4:11 These things command and teach.

4:12 Let no man despise thy youth; but be thou an example of the
believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith,
in purity.

4:13 Till I come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to
doctrine.

4:14 Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery.

4:15 Meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them; that thy
profiting may appear to all.

4:16 Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them:
for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear
thee.

5:1 Rebuke not an elder, but intreat him as a father; and the younger
men as brethren; 5:2 The elder women as mothers; the younger as
sisters, with all purity.

5:3 Honour widows that are widows indeed.

5:4 But if any widow have children or nephews, let them learn first to
shew piety at home, and to requite their parents: for that is good and
acceptable before God.

5:5 Now she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, trusteth in God, and
continueth in supplications and prayers night and day.

5:6 But she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth.

5:7 And these things give in charge, that they may be blameless.

5:8 But if any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his
own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel.

5:9 Let not a widow be taken into the number under threescore years
old, having been the wife of one man.

5:10 Well reported of for good works; if she have brought up children,
if she have lodged strangers, if she have washed the saints' feet, if
she have relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every
good work.

5:11 But the younger widows refuse: for when they have begun to wax
wanton against Christ, they will marry; 5:12 Having damnation, because
they have cast off their first faith.

5:13 And withal they learn to be idle, wandering about from house to
house; and not only idle, but tattlers also and busybodies, speaking
things which they ought not.

5:14 I will therefore that the younger women marry, bear children,
guide the house, give none occasion to the adversary to speak
reproachfully.

5:15 For some are already turned aside after Satan.

5:16 If any man or woman that believeth have widows, let them relieve
them, and let not the church be charged; that it may relieve them that
are widows indeed.

5:17 Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honour,
especially they who labour in the word and doctrine.

5:18 For the scripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that
treadeth out the corn. And, The labourer is worthy of his reward.

5:19 Against an elder receive not an accusation, but before two or
three witnesses.

5:20 Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear.

5:21 I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
elect angels, that thou observe these things without preferring one
before another, doing nothing by partiality.

5:22 Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's
sins: keep thyself pure.

5:23 Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomach's
sake and thine often infirmities.

5:24 Some men's sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment;
and some men they follow after.

5:25 Likewise also the good works of some are manifest beforehand; and
they that are otherwise cannot be hid.

6:1 Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their own masters
worthy of all honour, that the name of God and his doctrine be not
blasphemed.

6:2 And they that have believing masters, let them not despise them,
because they are brethren; but rather do them service, because they
are faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit. These things teach
and exhort.

6:3 If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words,
even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is
according to godliness; 6:4 He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting
about questions and strifes of words, whereof cometh envy, strife,
railings, evil surmisings, 6:5 Perverse disputings of men of corrupt
minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness:
from such withdraw thyself.

6:6 But godliness with contentment is great gain.

6:7 For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can
carry nothing out.

6:8 And having food and raiment let us be therewith content.

6:9 But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction
and perdition.

6:10 For the love of money is the root of all evil: which while some
coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves
through with many sorrows.

6:11 But thou, O man of God, flee these things; and follow after
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness.

6:12 Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life,
whereunto thou art also called, and hast professed a good profession
before many witnesses.

6:13 I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickeneth all
things, and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a
good confession; 6:14 That thou keep this commandment without spot,
unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: 6:15 Which
in his times he shall shew, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the
King of kings, and Lord of lords; 6:16 Who only hath immortality,
dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath
seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and power everlasting. Amen.

6:17 Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
highminded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who
giveth us richly all things to enjoy; 6:18 That they do good, that
they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate; 6:19 Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.

6:20 O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding
profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of science falsely so
called: 6:21 Which some professing have erred concerning the faith.
Grace be with thee. Amen.




The Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to Timothy


1:1 Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, according to
the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus, 1:2 To Timothy,
my dearly beloved son: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father
and Christ Jesus our Lord.

1:3 I thank God, whom I serve from my forefathers with pure
conscience, that without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my
prayers night and day; 1:4 Greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful
of thy tears, that I may be filled with joy; 1:5 When I call to
remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in
thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that
in thee also.

1:6 Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of
God, which is in thee by the putting on of my hands.

1:7 For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of
love, and of a sound mind.

1:8 Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of
me his prisoner: but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel
according to the power of God; 1:9 Who hath saved us, and called us
with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his
own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the
world began, 1:10 But is now made manifest by the appearing of our
Saviour Jesus Christ, who hath abolished death, and hath brought life
and immortality to light through the gospel: 1:11 Whereunto I am
appointed a preacher, and an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles.

1:12 For the which cause I also suffer these things: nevertheless I am
not ashamed: for I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he
is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day.

1:13 Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me,
in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

1:14 That good thing which was committed unto thee keep by the Holy
Ghost which dwelleth in us.

1:15 This thou knowest, that all they which are in Asia be turned away
from me; of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes.

1:16 The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus; for he oft
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain: 1:17 But, when he was
in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me.

1:18 The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in
that day: and in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus,
thou knowest very well.

2:1 Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ
Jesus.

2:2 And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses,
the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also.

2:3 Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ.

2:4 No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this
life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier.

2:5 And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned,
except he strive lawfully.

2:6 The husbandman that laboureth must be first partaker of the
fruits.

2:7 Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all
things.

2:8 Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from
the dead according to my gospel: 2:9 Wherein I suffer trouble, as an
evil doer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound.

2:10 Therefore I endure all things for the elect's sakes, that they
may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal
glory.

2:11 It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall
also live with him: 2:12 If we suffer, we shall also reign with him:
if we deny him, he also will deny us: 2:13 If we believe not, yet he
abideth faithful: he cannot deny himself.

2:14 Of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the
Lord that they strive not about words to no profit, but to the
subverting of the hearers.

2:15 Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.

2:16 But shun profane and vain babblings: for they will increase unto
more ungodliness.

2:17 And their word will eat as doth a canker: of whom is Hymenaeus
and Philetus; 2:18 Who concerning the truth have erred, saying that
the resurrection is past already; and overthrow the faith of some.

2:19 Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure, having this
seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, Let every one that
nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity.

2:20 But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of
silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to honour, and some to
dishonour.

2:21 If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel
unto honour, sanctified, and meet for the master's use, and prepared
unto every good work.

2:22 Flee also youthful lusts: but follow righteousness, faith,
charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart.

2:23 But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do
gender strifes.

2:24 And the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto
all men, apt to teach, patient, 2:25 In meekness instructing those
that oppose themselves; if God peradventure will give them repentance
to the acknowledging of the truth; 2:26 And that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him
at his will.

3:1 This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come.

3:2 For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters,
proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, 3:3
Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good, 3:4 Traitors, heady,
highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; 3:5 Having a
form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away.

3:6 For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead
captive silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts, 3:7
Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.

3:8 Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist
the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith.

3:9 But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be
manifest unto all men, as their's also was.

3:10 But thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose,
faith, longsuffering, charity, patience, 3:11 Persecutions,
afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra;
what persecutions I endured: but out of them all the Lord delivered
me.

3:12 Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution.

3:13 But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving,
and being deceived.

3:14 But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast
been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them; 3:15 And that
from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

3:16 All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness: 3:17 That the man of God may be perfect, throughly
furnished unto all good works.

4:1 I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom;
4:2 Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine.

4:3 For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine;
but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers,
having itching ears; 4:4 And they shall turn away their ears from the
truth, and shall be turned unto fables.

4:5 But watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of
an evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry.

4:6 For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is
at hand.

4:7 I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith: 4:8 Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at
that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his
appearing.

4:9 Do thy diligence to come shortly unto me: 4:10 For Demas hath
forsaken me, having loved this present world, and is departed unto
Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus unto Dalmatia.

4:11 Only Luke is with me. Take Mark, and bring him with thee: for he
is profitable to me for the ministry.

4:12 And Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus.

4:13 The cloke that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest,
bring with thee, and the books, but especially the parchments.

4:14 Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil: the Lord reward him
according to his works: 4:15 Of whom be thou ware also; for he hath
greatly withstood our words.

4:16 At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me:
I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge.

4:17 Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me; that
by me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles
might hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion.

4:18 And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will
preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom: to whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

4:19 Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus.

