13:7 Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto
you the word of God: whose faith follow, considering the end of their
conversation.

13:8 Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

13:9 Be not carried about with divers and strange doctrines. For it is
a good thing that the heart be established with grace; not with meats,
which have not profited them that have been occupied therein.

13:10 We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve
the tabernacle.

13:11 For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the
sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burned without the camp.

13:12 Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his
own blood, suffered without the gate.

13:13 Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his
reproach.

13:14 For here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come.

13:15 By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God
continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name.

13:16 But to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased.

13:17 Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves:
for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that
they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable
for you.

13:18 Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all
things willing to live honestly.

13:19 But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored
to you the sooner.

13:20 Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord
Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant, 13:21 Make you perfect in every good work to do
his will, working in you that which is wellpleasing in his sight,
through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

13:22 And I beseech you, brethren, suffer the word of exhortation: for
I have written a letter unto you in few words.

13:23 Know ye that our brother Timothy is set at liberty; with whom,
if he come shortly, I will see you.

13:24 Salute all them that have the rule over you, and all the saints.

They of Italy salute you.

13:25 Grace be with you all. Amen.




The General Epistle of James


1:1 James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ,
to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad, greeting.

1:2 My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers
temptations; 1:3 Knowing this, that the trying of your faith worketh
patience.

1:4 But let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing.

1:5 If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all
men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

1:6 But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth
is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed.

1:7 For let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the
Lord.

1:8 A double minded man is unstable in all his ways.

1:9 Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted: 1:10
But the rich, in that he is made low: because as the flower of the
grass he shall pass away.

1:11 For the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it
withereth the grass, and the flower thereof falleth, and the grace of
the fashion of it perisheth: so also shall the rich man fade away in
his ways.

1:12 Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is
tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath
promised to them that love him.

1:13 Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God
cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man: 1:14 But
every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and
enticed.

1:15 Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin,
when it is finished, bringeth forth death.

1:16 Do not err, my beloved brethren.

1:17 Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh
down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning.

1:18 Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we
should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.

1:19 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear,
slow to speak, slow to wrath: 1:20 For the wrath of man worketh not
the righteousness of God.

1:21 Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness, and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is
able to save your souls.

1:22 But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your
own selves.

1:23 For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like
unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass: 1:24 For he
beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what
manner of man he was.

1:25 But whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth
therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this
man shall be blessed in his deed.

1:26 If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his
tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man's religion is vain.

1:27 Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep
himself unspotted from the world.

2:1 My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord
of glory, with respect of persons.

2:2 For if there come unto your assembly a man with a gold ring, in
goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment; 2:3
And ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, and say unto
him, Sit thou here in a good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou
there, or sit here under my footstool: 2:4 Are ye not then partial in
yourselves, and are become judges of evil thoughts?  2:5 Hearken, my
beloved brethren, Hath not God chosen the poor of this world rich in
faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them that
love him?  2:6 But ye have despised the poor. Do not rich men oppress
you, and draw you before the judgment seats?  2:7 Do not they
blaspheme that worthy name by the which ye are called?  2:8 If ye
fulfil the royal law according to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself, ye do well: 2:9 But if ye have respect to
persons, ye commit sin, and are convinced of the law as transgressors.

2:10 For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one
point, he is guilty of all.

2:11 For he that said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill.
Now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a
transgressor of the law.

2:12 So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law
of liberty.

2:13 For he shall have judgment without mercy, that hath shewed no
mercy; and mercy rejoiceth against judgment.

2:14 What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith,
and have not works? can faith save him?  2:15 If a brother or sister
be naked, and destitute of daily food, 2:16 And one of you say unto
them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye
give them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it
profit?  2:17 Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being
alone.

2:18 Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works: shew me
thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my
works.

2:19 Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils
also believe, and tremble.

2:20 But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?
2:21 Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he had
offered Isaac his son upon the altar?  2:22 Seest thou how faith
wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect?  2:23 And
the scripture was fulfilled which saith, Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed unto him for righteousness: and he was called the Friend
of God.

2:24 Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by
faith only.

2:25 Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified by works, when
she had received the messengers, and had sent them out another way?
2:26 For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without
works is dead also.

3:1 My brethren, be not many masters, knowing that we shall receive
the greater condemnation.

3:2 For in many things we offend all. If any man offend not in word,
the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body.

3:3 Behold, we put bits in the horses' mouths, that they may obey us;
and we turn about their whole body.

3:4 Behold also the ships, which though they be so great, and are
driven of fierce winds, yet are they turned about with a very small
helm, whithersoever the governor listeth.

3:5 Even so the tongue is a little member, and boasteth great things.

Behold, how great a matter a little fire kindleth!  3:6 And the tongue
is a fire, a world of iniquity: so is the tongue among our members,
that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire the course of
nature; and it is set on fire of hell.

3:7 For every kind of beasts, and of birds, and of serpents, and of
things in the sea, is tamed, and hath been tamed of mankind: 3:8 But
the tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly evil, full of deadly
poison.

3:9 Therewith bless we God, even the Father; and therewith curse we
men, which are made after the similitude of God.

3:10 Out of the same mouth proceedeth blessing and cursing. My
brethren, these things ought not so to be.

3:11 Doth a fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and
bitter?  3:12 Can the fig tree, my brethren, bear olive berries?
either a vine, figs? so can no fountain both yield salt water and
fresh.

3:13 Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge among you? let him
shew out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom.

3:14 But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory
not, and lie not against the truth.

3:15 This wisdom descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual,
devilish.

3:16 For where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every
evil work.

3:17 But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without partiality, and without hypocrisy.

3:18 And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make
peace.

4:1 From whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not
hence, even of your lusts that war in your members?  4:2 Ye lust, and
have not: ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and
war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not.

4:3 Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume
it upon your lusts.

4:4 Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of
the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of
the world is the enemy of God.

4:5 Do ye think that the scripture saith in vain, The spirit that
dwelleth in us lusteth to envy?  4:6 But he giveth more grace.
Wherefore he saith, God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the
humble.

4:7 Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will
flee from you.

4:8 Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Cleanse your
hands, ye sinners; and purify your hearts, ye double minded.

4:9 Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: let your laughter be turned to
mourning, and your joy to heaviness.

4:10 Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you
up.

4:11 Speak not evil one of another, brethren. He that speaketh evil of
his brother, and judgeth his brother, speaketh evil of the law, and
judgeth the law: but if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer of the
law, but a judge.

4:12 There is one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy: who
art thou that judgest another?  4:13 Go to now, ye that say, To day or
to morrow we will go into such a city, and continue there a year, and
buy and sell, and get gain: 4:14 Whereas ye know not what shall be on
the morrow. For what is your life? It is even a vapour, that appeareth
for a little time, and then vanisheth away.

4:15 For that ye ought to say, If the Lord will, we shall live, and do
this, or that.

4:16 But now ye rejoice in your boastings: all such rejoicing is evil.

4:17 Therefore to him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to
him it is sin.

5:1 Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall
come upon you.

5:2 Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are motheaten.

5:3 Your gold and silver is cankered; and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have
heaped treasure together for the last days.

5:4 Behold, the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your
fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth: and the cries of
them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of
sabaoth.

5:5 Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye have
nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter.

5:6 Ye have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist you.

5:7 Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord.

Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth,
and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early and latter
rain.

5:8 Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts: for the coming of the
Lord draweth nigh.

5:9 Grudge not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned:
behold, the judge standeth before the door.

5:10 Take, my brethren, the prophets, who have spoken in the name of
the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience.

5:11 Behold, we count them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the
patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is
very pitiful, and of tender mercy.

5:12 But above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven,
neither by the earth, neither by any other oath: but let your yea be
yea; and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation.

5:13 Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him
sing psalms.

5:14 Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church;
and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the
Lord: 5:15 And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord
shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be
forgiven him.

5:16 Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another,
that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
availeth much.

5:17 Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed
earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained not on the earth by
the space of three years and six months.

5:18 And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth
brought forth her fruit.

5:19 Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert
him; 5:20 Let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the
error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a
multitude of sins.




The First Epistle General of Peter


1:1 Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers scattered
throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, 1:2 Elect
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through
sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the
blood of Jesus Christ: Grace unto you, and peace, be multiplied.

1:3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively
hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 1:4 To an
inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away,
reserved in heaven for you, 1:5 Who are kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.

1:6 Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need be,
ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations: 1:7 That the trial
of your faith, being much more precious than of gold that perisheth,
though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and honour
and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ: 1:8 Whom having not seen,
ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice
with joy unspeakable and full of glory: 1:9 Receiving the end of your
faith, even the salvation of your souls.

1:10 Of which salvation the prophets have enquired and searched
diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you:
1:11 Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which
was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings
of Christ, and the glory that should follow.

1:12 Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us
they did minister the things, which are now reported unto you by them
that have preached the gospel unto you with the Holy Ghost sent down
from heaven; which things the angels desire to look into.

1:13 Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to
the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation
of Jesus Christ; 1:14 As obedient children, not fashioning yourselves
according to the former lusts in your ignorance: 1:15 But as he which
hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation;
1:16 Because it is written, Be ye holy; for I am holy.

1:17 And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons
judgeth according to every man's work, pass the time of your
sojourning here in fear: 1:18 Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation received by tradition from your fathers; 1:19 But with
the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without
spot: 1:20 Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the
world, but was manifest in these last times for you, 1:21 Who by him
do believe in God, that raised him up from the dead, and gave him
glory; that your faith and hope might be in God.

1:22 Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through
the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that ye love one
another with a pure heart fervently: 1:23 Being born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which
liveth and abideth for ever.

1:24 For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower
of grass. The grass withereth, and the flower thereof falleth away:
1:25 But the word of the Lord endureth for ever. And this is the word
which by the gospel is preached unto you.

2:1 Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies,
and envies, all evil speakings, 2:2 As newborn babes, desire the
sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby: 2:3 If so be ye
have tasted that the Lord is gracious.

2:4 To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men,
but chosen of God, and precious, 2:5 Ye also, as lively stones, are
built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

2:6 Wherefore also it is contained in the scripture, Behold, I lay in
Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believeth on
him shall not be confounded.

2:7 Unto you therefore which believe he is precious: but unto them
which be disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the
same is made the head of the corner, 2:8 And a stone of stumbling, and
a rock of offence, even to them which stumble at the word, being
disobedient: whereunto also they were appointed.

2:9 But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of
him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light;
2:10 Which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of
God: which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.

2:11 Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain
from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul; 2:12 Having your
conversation honest among the Gentiles: that, whereas they speak
against you as evildoers, they may by your good works, which they
shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.

2:13 Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake:
whether it be to the king, as supreme; 2:14 Or unto governors, as unto
them that are sent by him for the punishment of evildoers, and for the
praise of them that do well.

2:15 For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men: 2:16 As free, and not using your
liberty for a cloke of maliciousness, but as the servants of God.

2:17 Honour all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honour the king.

2:18 Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear; not only to
the good and gentle, but also to the froward.

2:19 For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God
endure grief, suffering wrongfully.

2:20 For what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye
shall take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it,
ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God.

2:21 For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered
for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps: 2:22
Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: 2:23 Who, when
he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened
not; but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously: 2:24 Who
his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, being
dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye were
healed.

2:25 For ye were as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto the
Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.

3:1 Likewise, ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands; that,
if any obey not the word, they also may without the word be won by the
conversation of the wives; 3:2 While they behold your chaste
conversation coupled with fear.

3:3 Whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the
hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel; 3:4 But let
it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible,
even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of
God of great price.

3:5 For after this manner in the old time the holy women also, who
trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own
husbands: 3:6 Even as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him lord: whose
daughters ye are, as long as ye do well, and are not afraid with any
amazement.

3:7 Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge,
giving honour unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being
heirs together of the grace of life; that your prayers be not
hindered.

3:8 Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another,
love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: 3:9 Not rendering evil for
evil, or railing for railing: but contrariwise blessing; knowing that
ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing.

3:10 For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain
his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile: 3:11 Let
him eschew evil, and do good; let him seek peace, and ensue it.

3:12 For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are
open unto their prayers: but the face of the Lord is against them that
do evil.

3:13 And who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that
which is good?  3:14 But and if ye suffer for righteousness' sake,
happy are ye: and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled;
3:15 But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts: and be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that
is in you with meekness and fear: 3:16 Having a good conscience; that,
whereas they speak evil of you, as of evildoers, they may be ashamed
that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.

3:17 For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for
well doing, than for evil doing.

3:18 For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the
flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: 3:19 By which also he went and
preached unto the spirits in prison; 3:20 Which sometime were
disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of
Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls
were saved by water.

3:21 The like figure whereunto even baptism doth also now save us (not
the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God,) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ: 3:22 Who
is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God; angels and
authorities and powers being made subject unto him.

4:1 Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm
yourselves likewise with the same mind: for he that hath suffered in
the flesh hath ceased from sin; 4:2 That he no longer should live the
rest of his time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of
God.

4:3 For the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the
will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess
of wine, revellings, banquetings, and abominable idolatries: 4:4
Wherein they think it strange that ye run not with them to the same
excess of riot, speaking evil of you: 4:5 Who shall give account to
him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead.

4:6 For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are
dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but
live according to God in the spirit.

4:7 But the end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sober, and
watch unto prayer.

4:8 And above all things have fervent charity among yourselves: for
charity shall cover the multitude of sins.

4:9 Use hospitality one to another without grudging.

4:10 As every man hath received the gift, even so minister the same
one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.

4:11 If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God; if any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God giveth: that God
in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise
and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

4:12 Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is
to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you: 4:13 But
rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that,
when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding
joy.

4:14 If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the
spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you: on their part he is evil
spoken of, but on your part he is glorified.

4:15 But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an
evildoer, or as a busybody in other men's matters.

4:16 Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but
let him glorify God on this behalf.

4:17 For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of
God: and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that
obey not the gospel of God?  4:18 And if the righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?  4:19 Wherefore
let them that suffer according to the will of God commit the keeping
of their souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

5:1 The elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an elder, and
a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the
glory that shall be revealed: 5:2 Feed the flock of God which is among
you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly;
not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; 5:3 Neither as being lords
over God's heritage, but being ensamples to the flock.

5:4 And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown
of glory that fadeth not away.

5:5 Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves unto the elder. Yea, all
of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for
God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble.

5:6 Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he
may exalt you in due time: 5:7 Casting all your care upon him; for he
careth for you.

5:8 Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a
roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour: 5:9 Whom
resist stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are
accomplished in your brethren that are in the world.

5:10 But the God of all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal
glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you
perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you.

5:11 To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

5:12 By Silvanus, a faithful brother unto you, as I suppose, I have
written briefly, exhorting, and testifying that this is the true grace
of God wherein ye stand.

5:13 The church that is at Babylon, elected together with you,
saluteth you; and so doth Marcus my son.

5:14 Greet ye one another with a kiss of charity. Peace be with you
all that are in Christ Jesus. Amen.




The Second General Epistle of Peter


1:1 Simon Peter, a servant and an apostle of Jesus Christ, to them
that have obtained like precious faith with us through the
righteousness of God and our Saviour Jesus Christ: 1:2 Grace and peace
be multiplied unto you through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our
Lord, 1:3 According as his divine power hath given unto us all things
that pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him
that hath called us to glory and virtue: 1:4 Whereby are given unto us
exceeding great and precious promises: that by these ye might be
partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is
in the world through lust.

1:5 And beside this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue;
and to virtue knowledge; 1:6 And to knowledge temperance; and to
temperance patience; and to patience godliness; 1:7 And to godliness
brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity.

1:8 For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye
shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

1:9 But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar
off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.

1:10 Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your
calling and election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never
fall: 1:11 For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.

1:12 Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and be established
in the present truth.

1:13 Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir
you up by putting you in remembrance; 1:14 Knowing that shortly I must
put off this my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath shewed
me.

1:15 Moreover I will endeavour that ye may be able after my decease to
have these things always in remembrance.

1:16 For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made
known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were
eyewitnesses of his majesty.

1:17 For he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there
came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased.

1:18 And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with
him in the holy mount.

1:19 We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until
the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts: 1:20 Knowing this
first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private
interpretation.

1:21 For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but
holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

2:1 But there were false prophets also among the people, even as there
shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift destruction.

2:2 And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the
way of truth shall be evil spoken of.

2:3 And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make
merchandise of you: whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not,
and their damnation slumbereth not.

2:4 For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down
to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved
unto judgment; 2:5 And spared not the old world, but saved Noah the
eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon
the world of the ungodly; 2:6 And turning the cities of Sodom and
Gomorrha into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an
ensample unto those that after should live ungodly; 2:7 And delivered
just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked: 2:8 (For
that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed
his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds;) 2:9 The
Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished: 2:10 But
chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and
despise government. Presumptuous are they, selfwilled, they are not
afraid to speak evil of dignities.

2:11 Whereas angels, which are greater in power and might, bring not
railing accusation against them before the Lord.

2:12 But these, as natural brute beasts, made to be taken and
destroyed, speak evil of the things that they understand not; and
shall utterly perish in their own corruption; 2:13 And shall receive
the reward of unrighteousness, as they that count it pleasure to riot
in the day time. Spots they are and blemishes, sporting themselves
with their own deceivings while they feast with you; 2:14 Having eyes
full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin; beguiling unstable
souls: an heart they have exercised with covetous practices; cursed
children: 2:15 Which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray,
following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of
unrighteousness; 2:16 But was rebuked for his iniquity: the dumb ass
speaking with man's voice forbad the madness of the prophet.

2:17 These are wells without water, clouds that are carried with a
tempest; to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever.

2:18 For when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure
through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that
were clean escaped from them who live in error.

2:19 While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants
of corruption: for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought in bondage.

2:20 For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world
through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are
again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with
them than the beginning.

2:21 For it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment delivered unto them.

2:22 But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, The
dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was washed to
her wallowing in the mire.

3:1 This second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you; in both which
I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance: 3:2 That ye may be
mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets,
and of the commandment of us the apostles of the Lord and Saviour: 3:3
Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers,
walking after their own lusts, 3:4 And saying, Where is the promise of
his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as
they were from the beginning of the creation.

3:5 For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God
the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water and
in the water: 3:6 Whereby the world that then was, being overflowed
with water, perished: 3:7 But the heavens and the earth, which are
now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against
the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men.

3:8 But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is
with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.

3:9 The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count
slackness; but is longsuffering to us-ward, not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance.

3:10 But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the
which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements
shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are
therein shall be burned up.

3:11 Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner
of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness, 3:12
Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the
heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt
with fervent heat?  3:13 Nevertheless we, according to his promise,
look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.

3:14 Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be
diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and
blameless.

3:15 And account that the longsuffering of our Lord is salvation; even
as our beloved brother Paul also according to the wisdom given unto
him hath written unto you; 3:16 As also in all his epistles, speaking
in them of these things; in which are some things hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they
do also the other scriptures, unto their own destruction.

3:17 Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware
lest ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from
your own stedfastness.

3:18 But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ. To him be glory both now and for ever. Amen.




The First Epistle General of John


1:1 That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we
have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled, of the Word of life; 1:2 (For the life was manifested, and we
have seen it, and bear witness, and shew unto you that eternal life,
which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us;) 1:3 That which
we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have
fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and
with his Son Jesus Christ.

1:4 And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full.

1:5 This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare
unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.

1:6 If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness,
we lie, and do not the truth: 1:7 But if we walk in the light, as he
is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin.

1:8 If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth
is not in us.

1:9 If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

1:10 If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his
word is not in us.

2:1 My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin
not.

And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous: 2:2 And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not
for our's only, but also for the sins of the whole world.

2:3 And hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his
commandments.

2:4 He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a
liar, and the truth is not in him.

2:5 But whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of God
perfected: hereby know we that we are in him.

2:6 He that saith he abideth in him ought himself also so to walk,
even as he walked.

2:7 Brethren, I write no new commandment unto you, but an old
commandment which ye had from the beginning. The old commandment is
the word which ye have heard from the beginning.

2:8 Again, a new commandment I write unto you, which thing is true in
him and in you: because the darkness is past, and the true light now
shineth.

2:9 He that saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is in
darkness even until now.

2:10 He that loveth his brother abideth in the light, and there is
none occasion of stumbling in him.

2:11 But he that hateth his brother is in darkness, and walketh in
darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth, because that darkness hath
blinded his eyes.

2:12 I write unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven
you for his name's sake.

2:13 I write unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from
the beginning. I write unto you, young men, because ye have overcome
the wicked one. I write unto you, little children, because ye have
known the Father.

2:14 I have written unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that
is from the beginning. I have written unto you, young men, because ye
are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome
the wicked one.

2:15 Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If
any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

2:16 For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust
of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of
the world.

2:17 And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that
doeth the will of God abideth for ever.

2:18 Little children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that
antichrist shall come, even now are there many antichrists; whereby we
know that it is the last time.

2:19 They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had
been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went
out, that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.

2:20 But ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things.

2:21 I have not written unto you because ye know not the truth, but
because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth.

2:22 Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is
antichrist, that denieth the Father and the Son.

2:23 Whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father: he that
acknowledgeth the Son hath the Father also.

2:24 Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the
beginning. If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain
in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father.

2:25 And this is the promise that he hath promised us, even eternal
life.

2:26 These things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce
you.

2:27 But the anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you,
and ye need not that any man teach you: but as the same anointing
teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as
it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him.

2:28 And now, little children, abide in him; that, when he shall
appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his
coming.

2:29 If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that
doeth righteousness is born of him.

3:1 Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that
we should be called the sons of God: therefore the world knoweth us
not, because it knew him not.

3:2 Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear
what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be
like him; for we shall see him as he is.

3:3 And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even
as he is pure.

3:4 Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the law: for sin is
the transgression of the law.
