
3:5 And ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins; and in
him is no sin.

3:6 Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not: whosoever sinneth hath not
seen him, neither known him.

3:7 Little children, let no man deceive you: he that doeth
righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous.

3:8 He that committeth sin is of the devil; for the devil sinneth from
the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he
might destroy the works of the devil.

3:9 Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin; for his seed
remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.

3:10 In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
devil: whosoever doeth not righteousness is not of God, neither he
that loveth not his brother.

3:11 For this is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that we
should love one another.

3:12 Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew his brother.
And wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil, and his
brother's righteous.

3:13 Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you.

3:14 We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love
the brethren. He that loveth not his brother abideth in death.

3:15 Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer: and ye know that no
murderer hath eternal life abiding in him.

3:16 Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life
for us: and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.

3:17 But whoso hath this world's good, and seeth his brother have
need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth
the love of God in him?  3:18 My little children, let us not love in
word, neither in tongue; but in deed and in truth.

3:19 And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our
hearts before him.

3:20 For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and
knoweth all things.

3:21 Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God.

3:22 And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his
commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight.

3:23 And this is his commandment, That we should believe on the name
of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us
commandment.

3:24 And he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he in
him.

And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath
given us.

4:1 Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether
they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the
world.

4:2 Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesseth
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: 4:3 And every spirit
that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of
God: and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that
it should come; and even now already is it in the world.

4:4 Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them: because
greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world.

4:5 They are of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the
world heareth them.

4:6 We are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of
God heareth not us. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit
of error.

4:7 Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every
one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God.

4:8 He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love.

4:9 In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God
sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through
him.

4:10 Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.

4:11 Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.

4:12 No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God
dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us.

4:13 Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he
hath given us of his Spirit.

4:14 And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to
be the Saviour of the world.

4:15 Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God
dwelleth in him, and he in God.

4:16 And we have known and believed the love that God hath to us. God
is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him.

4:17 Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the
day of judgment: because as he is, so are we in this world.

4:18 There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear:
because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect in
love.

4:19 We love him, because he first loved us.

4:20 If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar:
for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love
God whom he hath not seen?  4:21 And this commandment have we from
him, That he who loveth God love his brother also.

5:1 Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: and
every one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten
of him.

5:2 By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love
God, and keep his commandments.

5:3 For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments: and
his commandments are not grievous.

5:4 For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world: and this is
the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith.

5:5 Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that
Jesus is the Son of God?  5:6 This is he that came by water and blood,
even Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. And it
is the Spirit that beareth witness, because the Spirit is truth.

5:7 For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one.

5:8 And there are three that bear witness in earth, the Spirit, and
the water, and the blood: and these three agree in one.

5:9 If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater:
for this is the witness of God which he hath testified of his Son.

5:10 He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself:
he that believeth not God hath made him a liar; because he believeth
not the record that God gave of his Son.

5:11 And this is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life,
and this life is in his Son.

5:12 He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of
God hath not life.

5:13 These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of
the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that
ye may believe on the name of the Son of God.

5:14 And this is the confidence that we have in him, that, if we ask
any thing according to his will, he heareth us: 5:15 And if we know
that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions
that we desired of him.

5:16 If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he
shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto
death. There is a sin unto death: I do not say that he shall pray for
it.

5:17 All unrighteousness is sin: and there is a sin not unto death.

5:18 We know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not; but he that is
begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not.

5:19 And we know that we are of God, and the whole world lieth in
wickedness.

5:20 And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him
that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and
eternal life.

5:21 Little children, keep yourselves from idols. Amen.




The Second Epistle General of John


1:1 The elder unto the elect lady and her children, whom I love in
the truth; and not I only, but also all they that have known the
truth; 1:2 For the truth's sake, which dwelleth in us, and shall be
with us for ever.

1:3 Grace be with you, mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and from
the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.

1:4 I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy children walking in truth,
as we have received a commandment from the Father.

1:5 And now I beseech thee, lady, not as though I wrote a new
commandment unto thee, but that which we had from the beginning, that
we love one another.

1:6 And this is love, that we walk after his commandments. This is the
commandment, That, as ye have heard from the beginning, ye should walk
in it.

1:7 For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an
antichrist.

1:8 Look to yourselves, that we lose not those things which we have
wrought, but that we receive a full reward.

1:9 Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of
Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he
hath both the Father and the Son.

1:10 If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive
him not into your house, neither bid him God speed: 1:11 For he that
biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds.

1:12 Having many things to write unto you, I would not write with
paper and ink: but I trust to come unto you, and speak face to face,
that our joy may be full.

1:13 The children of thy elect sister greet thee. Amen.




The Third Epistle General of John


1:1 The elder unto the wellbeloved Gaius, whom I love in the truth.

1:2 Beloved, I wish above all things that thou mayest prosper and be
in health, even as thy soul prospereth.

1:3 For I rejoiced greatly, when the brethren came and testified of
the truth that is in thee, even as thou walkest in the truth.

1:4 I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth.

1:5 Beloved, thou doest faithfully whatsoever thou doest to the
brethren, and to strangers; 1:6 Which have borne witness of thy
charity before the church: whom if thou bring forward on their journey
after a godly sort, thou shalt do well: 1:7 Because that for his
name's sake they went forth, taking nothing of the Gentiles.

1:8 We therefore ought to receive such, that we might be fellowhelpers
to the truth.

1:9 I wrote unto the church: but Diotrephes, who loveth to have the
preeminence among them, receiveth us not.

1:10 Wherefore, if I come, I will remember his deeds which he doeth,
prating against us with malicious words: and not content therewith,
neither doth he himself receive the brethren, and forbiddeth them that
would, and casteth them out of the church.

1:11 Beloved, follow not that which is evil, but that which is good.
He that doeth good is of God: but he that doeth evil hath not seen
God.

1:12 Demetrius hath good report of all men, and of the truth itself:
yea, and we also bear record; and ye know that our record is true.

1:13 I had many things to write, but I will not with ink and pen write
unto thee: 1:14 But I trust I shall shortly see thee, and we shall
speak face to face. Peace be to thee. Our friends salute thee. Greet
the friends by name.




The General Epistle of Jude


1:1 Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them
that are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ,
and called: 1:2 Mercy unto you, and peace, and love, be multiplied.

1:3 Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common
salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you
that ye should earnestly contend for the faith which was once
delivered unto the saints.

1:4 For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of
old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of
our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our
Lord Jesus Christ.

1:5 I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this,
how that the Lord, having saved the people out of the land of Egypt,
afterward destroyed them that believed not.

1:6 And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their
own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness
unto the judgment of the great day.

1:7 Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them in like
manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange
flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire.

1:8 Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities.

1:9 Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he
disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a
railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.

1:10 But these speak evil of those things which they know not: but
what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they
corrupt themselves.

1:11 Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran
greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the
gainsaying of Core.

1:12 These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with
you, feeding themselves without fear: clouds they are without water,
carried about of winds; trees whose fruit withereth, without fruit,
twice dead, plucked up by the roots; 1:13 Raging waves of the sea,
foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever.

1:14 And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these,
saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, 1:15
To execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly
among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him.

1:16 These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts;
and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having men's persons in
admiration because of advantage.

1:17 But, beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of
the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; 1:18 How that they told you
there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their
own ungodly lusts.

1:19 These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the
Spirit.

1:20 But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy faith,
praying in the Holy Ghost, 1:21 Keep yourselves in the love of God,
looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.

1:22 And of some have compassion, making a difference: 1:23 And others
save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garment
spotted by the flesh.

1:24 Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to
present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding
joy, 1:25 To the only wise God our Saviour, be glory and majesty,
dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen.




The Revelation of Saint John the Devine


1:1 The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to shew
unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent
and signified it by his angel unto his servant John: 1:2 Who bare
record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, and
of all things that he saw.

1:3 Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this
prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein: for the
time is at hand.

1:4 John to the seven churches which are in Asia: Grace be unto you,
and peace, from him which is, and which was, and which is to come; and
from the seven Spirits which are before his throne; 1:5 And from Jesus
Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the
dead, and the prince of the kings of the earth. Unto him that loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, 1:6 And hath made us
kings and priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

1:7 Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him, and
they also which pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail
because of him. Even so, Amen.

1:8 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the
Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.

1:9 I John, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation,
and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the isle that
is called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus
Christ.

1:10 I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and heard behind me a
great voice, as of a trumpet, 1:11 Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the
first and the last: and, What thou seest, write in a book, and send it
unto the seven churches which are in Asia; unto Ephesus, and unto
Smyrna, and unto Pergamos, and unto Thyatira, and unto Sardis, and
unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea.

1:12 And I turned to see the voice that spake with me. And being
turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks; 1:13 And in the midst of the
seven candlesticks one like unto the Son of man, clothed with a
garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden
girdle.

1:14 His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow;
and his eyes were as a flame of fire; 1:15 And his feet like unto fine
brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice as the sound of
many waters.

1:16 And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth
went a sharp twoedged sword: and his countenance was as the sun
shineth in his strength.

1:17 And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. And he laid his
right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first and the
last: 1:18 I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive
for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and of death.

1:19 Write the things which thou hast seen, and the things which are,
and the things which shall be hereafter; 1:20 The mystery of the seven
stars which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden
candlesticks. The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches:
and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven churches.

2:1 Unto the angel of the church of Ephesus write; These things saith
he that holdeth the seven stars in his right hand, who walketh in the
midst of the seven golden candlesticks; 2:2 I know thy works, and thy
labour, and thy patience, and how thou canst not bear them which are
evil: and thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and are
not, and hast found them liars: 2:3 And hast borne, and hast patience,
and for my name's sake hast laboured, and hast not fainted.

2:4 Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left
thy first love.

2:5 Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do
the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will
remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.

2:6 But this thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds of the
Nicolaitanes, which I also hate.

2:7 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
churches; To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of
life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God.

2:8 And unto the angel of the church in Smyrna write; These things
saith the first and the last, which was dead, and is alive; 2:9 I know
thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, (but thou art rich) and I
know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, but
are the synagogue of Satan.

2:10 Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer: behold, the
devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye
shall have tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I
will give thee a crown of life.

2:11 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
churches; He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death.

2:12 And to the angel of the church in Pergamos write; These things
saith he which hath the sharp sword with two edges; 2:13 I know thy
works, and where thou dwellest, even where Satan's seat is: and thou
holdest fast my name, and hast not denied my faith, even in those days
wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where
Satan dwelleth.

2:14 But I have a few things against thee, because thou hast there
them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a
stumblingblock before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed
unto idols, and to commit fornication.

2:15 So hast thou also them that hold the doctrine of the
Nicolaitanes, which thing I hate.

2:16 Repent; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight
against them with the sword of my mouth.

2:17 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
churches; To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden
manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name
written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it.

2:18 And unto the angel of the church in Thyatira write; These things
saith the Son of God, who hath his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and
his feet are like fine brass; 2:19 I know thy works, and charity, and
service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works; and the last to
be more than the first.

2:20 Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou
sufferest that woman Jezebel, which calleth herself a prophetess, to
teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat
things sacrificed unto idols.

2:21 And I gave her space to repent of her fornication; and she
repented not.

2:22 Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultery
with her into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds.

2:23 And I will kill her children with death; and all the churches
shall know that I am he which searcheth the reins and hearts: and I
will give unto every one of you according to your works.

2:24 But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira, as many as
have not this doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan,
as they speak; I will put upon you none other burden.

2:25 But that which ye have already hold fast till I come.

2:26 And he that overcometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, to him
will I give power over the nations: 2:27 And he shall rule them with a
rod of iron; as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to
shivers: even as I received of my Father.

2:28 And I will give him the morning star.

2:29 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
churches.

3:1 And unto the angel of the church in Sardis write; These things
saith he that hath the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars; I
know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead.

3:2 Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are
ready to die: for I have not found thy works perfect before God.

3:3 Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and hold
fast, and repent. If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come on
thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon
thee.

3:4 Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their
garments; and they shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy.

3:5 He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment;
and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will
confess his name before my Father, and before his angels.

3:6 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
churches.

3:7 And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write; These things
saith he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the key of David,
he that openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no man
openeth; 3:8 I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open
door, and no man can shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and
hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name.

3:9 Behold, I will make them of the synagogue of Satan, which say they
are Jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, I will make them to come
and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee.

3:10 Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep
thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world,
to try them that dwell upon the earth.

3:11 Behold, I come quickly: hold that fast which thou hast, that no
man take thy crown.

3:12 Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God,
and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my
God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which
cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my
new name.

3:13 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
churches.

3:14 And unto the angel of the church of the Laodiceans write; These
things saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of
the creation of God; 3:15 I know thy works, that thou art neither cold
nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot.

3:16 So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I
will spue thee out of my mouth.

3:17 Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods, and
have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: 3:18 I counsel thee to buy
of me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white
raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eyesalve, that
thou mayest see.

3:19 As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore,
and repent.

3:20 Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and
he with me.

3:21 To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne,
even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne.

3:22 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
churches.

4:1 After this I looked, and, behold, a door was opened in heaven: and
the first voice which I heard was as it were of a trumpet talking with
me; which said, Come up hither, and I will shew thee things which must
be hereafter.

4:2 And immediately I was in the spirit: and, behold, a throne was set
in heaven, and one sat on the throne.

4:3 And he that sat was to look upon like a jasper and a sardine
stone: and there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like
unto an emerald.

4:4 And round about the throne were four and twenty seats: and upon
the seats I saw four and twenty elders sitting, clothed in white
raiment; and they had on their heads crowns of gold.

4:5 And out of the throne proceeded lightnings and thunderings and
voices: and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne,
which are the seven Spirits of God.

4:6 And before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal:
and in the midst of the throne, and round about the throne, were four
beasts full of eyes before and behind.

4:7 And the first beast was like a lion, and the second beast like a
calf, and the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast
was like a flying eagle.

4:8 And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him; and they
were full of eyes within: and they rest not day and night, saying,
Holy, holy, holy, LORD God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to
come.

4:9 And when those beasts give glory and honour and thanks to him that
sat on the throne, who liveth for ever and ever, 4:10 The four and
twenty elders fall down before him that sat on the throne, and worship
him that liveth for ever and ever, and cast their crowns before the
throne, saying, 4:11 Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and
honour and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy
pleasure they are and were created.

5:1 And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book
written within and on the backside, sealed with seven seals.

5:2 And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is
worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?  5:3 And no
man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to open
the book, neither to look thereon.

5:4 And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open and to
read the book, neither to look thereon.

5:5 And one of the elders saith unto me, Weep not: behold, the Lion of
the tribe of Juda, the Root of David, hath prevailed to open the book,
and to loose the seven seals thereof.

5:6 And I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne and of the four
beasts, and in the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb as it had been
slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits
of God sent forth into all the earth.

5:7 And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that
sat upon the throne.

5:8 And when he had taken the book, the four beasts and four and
twenty elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them
harps, and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of
saints.

5:9 And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the
book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast
redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and nation; 5:10 And hast made us unto our God kings and
priests: and we shall reign on the earth.

5:11 And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about
the throne and the beasts and the elders: and the number of them was
ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands; 5:12
Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory,
and blessing.

5:13 And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and
under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them,
heard I saying, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto
him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

5:14 And the four beasts said, Amen. And the four and twenty elders
fell down and worshipped him that liveth for ever and ever.

6:1 And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard, as
it were the noise of thunder, one of the four beasts saying, Come and
see.

6:2 And I saw, and behold a white horse: and he that sat on him had a
bow; and a crown was given unto him: and he went forth conquering, and
to conquer.

6:3 And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second beast
say, Come and see.

6:4 And there went out another horse that was red: and power was given
to him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and that they
should kill one another: and there was given unto him a great sword.

6:5 And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third beast
say, Come and see. And I beheld, and lo a black horse; and he that sat
on him had a pair of balances in his hand.

6:6 And I heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts say, A measure
of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny; and
see thou hurt not the oil and the wine.

6:7 And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the
fourth beast say, Come and see.

6:8 And I looked, and behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on
him was Death, and Hell followed with him. And power was given unto
them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with
hunger, and with death, and with the beasts of the earth.

6:9 And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the
souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they held: 6:10 And they cried with a loud voice,
saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?  6:11 And white
robes were given unto every one of them; and it was said unto them,
that they should rest yet for a little season, until their
fellowservants also and their brethren, that should be killed as they
were, should be fulfilled.

6:12 And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and, lo, there
was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair,
and the moon became as blood; 6:13 And the stars of heaven fell unto
the earth, even as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is
shaken of a mighty wind.

6:14 And the heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled together;
and every mountain and island were moved out of their places.

6:15 And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men,
and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and
every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the
mountains; 6:16 And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and
hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb: 6:17 For the great day of his wrath is come; and
who shall be able to stand?  7:1 And after these things I saw four
angels standing on the four corners of the earth, holding the four
winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow on the earth, nor on
the sea, nor on any tree.

7:2 And I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal
of the living God: and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels,
to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea, 7:3 Saying, Hurt
not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the
servants of our God in their foreheads.

7:4 And I heard the number of them which were sealed: and there were
sealed an hundred and forty and four thousand of all the tribes of the
children of Israel.

7:5 Of the tribe of Juda were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of
Reuben were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed
twelve thousand.

7:6 Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of
Nephthalim were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Manasses were
sealed twelve thousand.

7:7 Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe
of Levi were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Issachar were
sealed twelve thousand.

7:8 Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe
of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Benjamin were
sealed twelve thousand.

7:9 After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man
could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues,
stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white
robes, and palms in their hands; 7:10 And cried with a loud voice,
saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto
the Lamb.

7:11 And all the angels stood round about the throne, and about the
elders and the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their faces,
and worshipped God, 7:12 Saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and
wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto
our God for ever and ever. Amen.

7:13 And one of the elders answered, saying unto me, What are these
which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came they?  7:14 And I
said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, These are they
which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and
made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

7:15 Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day
and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell
among them.

7:16 They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall
the sun light on them, nor any heat.

7:17 For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them,
and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes.

8:1 And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in
heaven about the space of half an hour.

8:2 And I saw the seven angels which stood before God; and to them
were given seven trumpets.

8:3 And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden
censer; and there was given unto him much incense, that he should
offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar which
was before the throne.

8:4 And the smoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of the
saints, ascended up before God out of the angel's hand.

8:5 And the angel took the censer, and filled it with fire of the
altar, and cast it into the earth: and there were voices, and
thunderings, and lightnings, and an earthquake.

8:6 And the seven angels which had the seven trumpets prepared
themselves to sound.

8:7 The first angel sounded, and there followed hail and fire mingled
with blood, and they were cast upon the earth: and the third part of
trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.

8:8 And the second angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain
burning with fire was cast into the sea: and the third part of the sea
became blood; 8:9 And the third part of the creatures which were in
the sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships were
destroyed.

8:10 And the third angel sounded, and there fell a great star from
heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of
the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters; 8:11 And the name of the
star is called Wormwood: and the third part of the waters became
wormwood; and many men died of the waters, because they were made
bitter.

8:12 And the fourth angel sounded, and the third part of the sun was
smitten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the
stars; so as the third part of them was darkened, and the day shone
not for a third part of it, and the night likewise.

8:13 And I beheld, and heard an angel flying through the midst of
heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of
the earth by reason of the other voices of the trumpet of the three
angels, which are yet to sound!  9:1 And the fifth angel sounded, and
I saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth: and to him was given the
key of the bottomless pit.

9:2 And he opened the bottomless pit; and there arose a smoke out of
the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and the air were
darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit.

9:3 And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth: and unto
them was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power.

9:4 And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of
the earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree; but only those
men which have not the seal of God in their foreheads.

9:5 And to them it was given that they should not kill them, but that
they should be tormented five months: and their torment was as the
torment of a scorpion, when he striketh a man.

9:6 And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and
shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them.

9:7 And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto
battle; and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their
faces were as the faces of men.

9:8 And they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as
the teeth of lions.

9:9 And they had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron; and
the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses
running to battle.

9:10 And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in
their tails: and their power was to hurt men five months.

9:11 And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the
bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the
Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon.

9:12 One woe is past; and, behold, there come two woes more hereafter.

9:13 And the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four
horns of the golden altar which is before God, 9:14 Saying to the
sixth angel which had the trumpet, Loose the four angels which are
bound in the great river Euphrates.

9:15 And the four angels were loosed, which were prepared for an hour,
and a day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third part of men.

9:16 And the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred
thousand thousand: and I heard the number of them.

9:17 And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on
them, having breastplates of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone: and
the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions; and out of their
mouths issued fire and smoke and brimstone.

9:18 By these three was the third part of men killed, by the fire, and
by the smoke, and by the brimstone, which issued out of their mouths.

9:19 For their power is in their mouth, and in their tails: for their
tails were like unto serpents, and had heads, and with them they do
hurt.

9:20 And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues
yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not
worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone,
and of wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk: 9:21 Neither
repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their
fornication, nor of their thefts.

10:1 And I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed
with a cloud: and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it
were the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire: 10:2 And he had in his
hand a little book open: and he set his right foot upon the sea, and
his left foot on the earth, 10:3 And cried with a loud voice, as when
a lion roareth: and when he had cried, seven thunders uttered their
voices.

10:4 And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about
to write: and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Seal up
those things which the seven thunders uttered, and write them not.

10:5 And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth
lifted up his hand to heaven, 10:6 And sware by him that liveth for
ever and ever, who created heaven, and the things that therein are,
and the earth, and the things that therein are, and the sea, and the
things which are therein, that there should be time no longer: 10:7
But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin
to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he hath declared
to his servants the prophets.

10:8 And the voice which I heard from heaven spake unto me again, and
said, Go and take the little book which is open in the hand of the
angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth.

10:9 And I went unto the angel, and said unto him, Give me the little
book. And he said unto me, Take it, and eat it up; and it shall make
thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey.

10:10 And I took the little book out of the angel's hand, and ate it
up; and it was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as I had eaten
it, my belly was bitter.

10:11 And he said unto me, Thou must prophesy again before many
peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings.

11:1 And there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel
stood, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and
them that worship therein.

11:2 But the court which is without the temple leave out, and measure
it not; for it is given unto the Gentiles: and the holy city shall
they tread under foot forty and two months.

11:3 And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall
prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in
sackcloth.

11:4 These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing
before the God of the earth.

11:5 And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their
mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he
must in this manner be killed.

11:6 These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of
their prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and
to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will.
